As a number of attempts have been made to put together in order an account of those events which took place among us ,
As they were handed down to us by those who saw them from the first and were preachers of the word ,
It seemed good to me , having made observation , with great care , of the direction of events in their order , to put the facts in writing for you , most noble Theophilus ;
So that you might have certain knowledge of those things about which you were given teaching .
In the days of Herod , king of Judaea , there was a certain priest , by name Zacharias , of the order of Abijah ; and he had a wife of the family of Aaron , and her name was Elisabeth .
They were upright in the eyes of God , keeping all the rules and orders of God , and doing no wrong .
And they were without children , because Elisabeth had never given birth , and they were at that time very old .
Now it came about that in his turn he was acting as priest before God ,
And as was the way of the priests , he had to go into the Temple to see to the burning of perfumes .
And all the people were offering prayers outside , at the time of the burning of perfumes .
And he saw an angel of the Lord in his place on the right side of the altar .
And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him , and fear came on him .
But the angel said , Have no fear , Zacharias , for your prayer has come to the ears of God , and your wife Elisabeth will have a son , and his name will be John .
And you will be glad and have great delight ; and numbers of people will have joy at his birth .
For he will be great in the eyes of the Lord ; he will not take wine or strong drink ; and he will be full of the Spirit of God from his birth .
And through him great numbers of the children of Israel will be turned to the Lord their God .
And he will go before his face in the spirit and power of Elijah , turning the hearts of fathers to their children , and wrongdoers to the way of righteousness ; to make ready a people whose hearts have been turned to the Lord .
And Zacharias said to the angel , How may I be certain of this ? For I am an old man , and my wife is far on in years .
And the angel , answering , said , I am Gabriel , whose place is before God ; I have been sent to say these words to you and to give you this good news .
Now , see , you will be without voice or language till the day when these things come about , because you had not faith in my words , which will have effect at the right time .
And the people were waiting for Zacharias and were surprised because he was in the Temple for such a long time .
And when he came out he was not able to say anything , and they saw that he had seen a vision in the Temple ; and he was making signs to them without words .
And when the days of his work in the Temple were ended , he went back to his house .
After that time , Elisabeth , being certain that she was to become a mother , kept herself from men's eyes for five months , saying ,
The Lord has done this to me , for his eyes were on me , to take away my shame in the eyes of men .
Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town in Galilee , named Nazareth ,
To a virgin who was to be married to a man named Joseph , of the family of David ; and the name of the virgin was Mary .
And the angel came in to her and said , Peace be with you , to whom special grace has been given ; the Lord is with you .
But she was greatly troubled at his words , and said to herself , What may be the purpose of these words ?
And the angel said to her , Have no fear , Mary , for you have God's approval .
And see , you will give birth to a son , and his name will be Jesus .
He will be great , and will be named the Son of the Most High : and the Lord God will give him the kingdom of David , his father :
He will have rule over the house of Jacob for ever , and of his kingdom there will be no end .
And Mary said to the angel , How may this be , because I have had no knowledge of a man ?
And the angel in answer said to her , The Holy Spirit will come on you , and the power of the Most High will come to rest on you , and so that which will come to birth will be named holy , Son of God .
Even now Elisabeth , who is of your family , is to be a mother , though she is old : and this is the sixth month with her who was without children .
For there is nothing which God is not able to do .
And Mary said : I am the servant of the Lord ; may it be to me as you say . And the angel went away .
Then Mary got up and went quickly into the high lands , to a town of Judah ;
And went into the house of Zacharias and took Elisabeth in her arms .
And when the voice of Mary came to the ears of Elisabeth , the baby made a sudden move inside her ; then Elisabeth was full of the Holy Spirit ,
And she said with a loud voice : May blessing be on you among women , and a blessing on the child of your body .
How is it that the mother of my Lord comes to me ?
For , truly , when the sound of your voice came to my ears , the baby in my body made a sudden move for joy .
Happy will she be who had faith that the things which the Lord has said to her will be done .
And Mary said : My soul gives glory to God ;
My spirit is glad in God my Saviour .
For he has had pity on his servant , though she is poor and lowly placed : and from this hour will all generations give witness to the blessing which has come to me .
For he who is strong has done great things for me ; and holy is his name .
His mercy is for all generations in whom is the fear of him .
With his arm he has done acts of power ; he has put to flight those who have pride in their hearts .
He has put down kings from their seats , lifting up on high the men of low degree .
Those who had no food he made full of good things ; the men of wealth he sent away with nothing in their hands ;
His help he has given to Israel , his servant , so that he might keep in mind his mercy to Abraham and his seed for ever ,
As he gave his word to our fathers .
And Mary was with her for about three months and then went back to her house .
Now it was time for Elisabeth to give birth , and she had a son .
And it came to the ears of her neighbours and relations that the Lord had been very good to her , and they took part in her joy .
And on the eighth day they came to see to the circumcision of the child , and they would have given him the name of Zacharias , his father's name ;
But his mother made answer and said , No , his name is John .
And they said , Not one of your relations has that name .
And they made signs to his father , to say what name was to be given to him .
And he sent for writing materials and put down : His name is John ; and they were all surprised .
And straight away his mouth was open and his tongue was free and he gave praise to God .
And fear came on all those who were living round about them : and there was much talk about all these things in all the hill-country of Judaea .
And all who had word of them kept them in their minds and said , What will this child be ? For the hand of the Lord was with him .
And his father , Zacharias , was full of the Holy Spirit , and with the voice of a prophet said these words :
Praise be to the Lord , the God of Israel , for he has come to his people and made them free ,
Lifting up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David ,
(As he said , by the mouth of his holy prophets , from the earliest times ,)
Salvation from those who are against us , and from the hands of those who have hate for us ;
To do acts of mercy to our fathers and to keep in mind his holy word ,
The oath which he made to Abraham , our father ,
That we , being made free from the fear of those who are against us , might give him worship ,
In righteousness and holy living before him all our days .
And you , child , will be named the prophet of the Most High : you will go before the face of the Lord , to make ready his ways ;
To give knowledge of salvation to his people , through the forgiveness of sins ,
Because of the loving mercies of our God , by which the dawn from heaven has come to us ,
To give light to those in dark places , and in the shade of death , so that our feet may be guided into the way of peace .
And the child became tall , and strong in spirit ; and he was living in the waste land till the day when he came before the eyes of Israel .
Now it came about in those days that an order went out from Caesar Augustus that there was to be a numbering of all the world .
This was the first numbering , which was made when Quirinius was ruler of Syria .
And all men went to be numbered , everyone to his town .
And Joseph went up from Galilee , out of the town of Nazareth , into Judaea , to Beth-lehem , the town of David , because he was of the house and family of David ,
To be put on the list with Mary , his future wife , who was about to become a mother .
And while they were there , the time came for her to give birth .
And she had her first son ; and folding him in linen , she put him to rest in the place where the cattle had their food , because there was no room for them in the house .
And in the same country there were keepers of sheep in the fields , watching over their flock by night .
And an angel of the Lord came to them , and the glory of the Lord was shining round about them : and fear came on them .
And the angel said , Have no fear ; for truly , I give you good news of great joy which will be for all the people :
For on this day , in the town of David , a Saviour has come to birth , who is Christ the Lord .
And this is the sign to you : you will see a young child folded in linen , in the place where the cattle have their food .
And suddenly there was with the angel a great band of spirits from heaven , giving praise to God , and saying ,
Glory to God in the highest , and on the earth peace among men with whom he is well pleased .
And when the angels had gone away from them into heaven , the keepers of the sheep said to one another , Let us go now to Beth-lehem , and see this thing which has come about , which the Lord has made clear to us .
And they came quickly , and saw Mary and Joseph , and the child in the place where the cattle had their food .
And when they saw it , they gave them an account of the things which had been said to them about the child .
And all those to whose ears it came were full of wonder at the things said by the keepers of the sheep .
But Mary kept all these words in her heart , and gave much thought to them .
Then the keepers of the sheep went back , giving glory and praise to God for all the things which had come to their ears and which they had seen , as it had been said to them .
And when , after eight days , the time came for his circumcision , he was named Jesus , the name which the angel had given to him before his birth .
And when the necessary days for making them clean by the law of Moses had come to an end , they took him to Jerusalem to give him to the Lord
(As it says in the law of the Lord , Every mother's first male child is to be holy to the Lord) ,
And to make an offering , as it is ordered in the law of the Lord , of two doves or other young birds .
And there was then in Jerusalem a man whose name was Simeon ; and he was an upright man , fearing God and waiting for the comfort of Israel : and the Holy Spirit was on him .
And he had knowledge , through the Holy Spirit , that he would not see death till he had seen the Lord's Christ .
And full of the Spirit he came into the Temple ; and when the father and mother came in with the child Jesus , to do with him what was ordered by the law ,
Then he took him in his arms and gave praise to God and said ,
Now you are letting your servant go in peace , O Lord , as you have said ;
For my eyes have seen your salvation ,
Which you have made ready before the face of all nations ;
A light of revelation to the Gentiles , and the glory of your people Israel .
And his father and mother were full of wonder at the things which were said about him .
And Simeon gave them his blessing and said to Mary , his mother , See , this child will be the cause of the downfall and the lifting up of great numbers of people in Israel , and he will be a sign against which hard words will be said ;
(And a sword will go through your heart ;) so that the secret thoughts of men may come to light .
And there was one , Anna , a woman prophet , the daughter of Phanuel , of the family of Asher (she was very old , and after seven years of married life
She had been a widow for eighty-four years) ; she was in the Temple at all times , worshipping with prayers and going without food , night and day .
And coming up at that time , she gave praise to God , talking of him to all those who were waiting for the freeing of Jerusalem .
And when they had done all the things which were ordered by the law of the Lord , they went back to Galilee , to Nazareth , the town where they were living .
And the child became tall and strong and full of wisdom , and the grace of God was on him .
And every year his father and mother went to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover .
And when he was twelve years old , they went up , as their way was , to the feast ;
And when the days of the feast came to an end and they were going back , the boy Jesus was still in Jerusalem , but they had no knowledge of it :
And in the belief that he was with some of their number , they went a day's journey ; and after looking for him among their relations and friends ,
And seeing that he was not there , they went back to Jerusalem , to make search for him .
And after three days they came across him in the Temple , seated among the wise men , giving ear to their words and putting questions to them .
And all to whose ears it came were full of wonder at his knowledge and the answers which he gave .
And when they saw him they were surprised , and his mother said to him , Son , why have you done this to us ? see , your father and I have been looking for you with sorrow .
And he said to them , Why were you looking for me ? was it not clear to you that my right place was in my Father's house ?
And his words seemed strange to them .
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth ; and did as he was ordered : and his mother kept all these words in her heart .
And Jesus was increasing in wisdom and in years , and in grace before God and men .
Now in the fifteenth year of the rule of Tiberius Caesar , Pontius Pilate being ruler of Judaea , and Herod being king of Galilee , his brother Philip king of the country of Ituraea and Trachonitis , and Lysanias king of Abilene ,
When Annas and Caiaphas were high priests , the word of the Lord came to John , the son of Zacharias , in the waste land .
And he came into all the country round about Jordan , preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed .
As it says in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet , The voice of one crying in the waste land , Make ready the way of the Lord , make his roads straight .
Every valley will be lifted up , and all the mountains and hills made low , and the twisted will be made straight , and the rough ways smooth ;
And all flesh will see the salvation of God .
So he said to the people who went out to him for baptism : You offspring of snakes , at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come ?
Make clear by your acts that your hearts have been changed ; and do not say to yourselves , We have Abraham for our father : for I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children of Abraham .
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees ; and every tree which does not have good fruit will be cut down and put into the fire .
And the people put questions to him , saying , What have we to do ?
And he made answer and said to them , He who has two coats , let him give to him who has not even one ; and he who has food , let him do the same .
Then tax-farmers came to him for baptism and said to him , Master , what have we to do ?
And he said to them , Do not make an attempt to get more money than the right amount .
And men of the army put questions to him , saying , And what have we to do ? And he said to them , Do no violent acts to any man , and do not take anything without right , and let your payment be enough for you .
And while the people were waiting , and all men were questioning in their hearts about John , if he was the Christ or not ,
John made answer , saying to them all , Truly , I give you baptism with water , but one is coming who is greater than I , whose shoes I am not good enough to undo : he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit , and with fire :
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain ; he will put the good grain in his store , but the waste will be burned in the fire which will never be put out .
And so comforting them with these and other words , he gave the good news to the people ;
But Herod the king , because John had made a protest on account of Herodias , his brother's wife , and other evil things which Herod had done ,
Did this most evil thing of all , and had John shut up in prison .
Now it came about that when all the people had been given baptism , Jesus , having had baptism with them , was in prayer , when , the heaven being open ,
The Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove , and a voice came from heaven , saying , You are my dearly loved Son , with whom I am well pleased .
And Jesus at this time was about thirty years old , being the son (as it seemed) of Joseph , the son of Heli ,
The son of Matthat , the son of Levi , the son of Melchi , the son of Jannai , the son of Joseph ,
The son of Mattathias , the son of Amos , the son of Nahum , the son of Esli , the son of Naggai ,
The son of Maath , the son of Mattathias , the son of Semein , the son of Josech , the son of Joda ,
The son of Joanan , the son of Rhesa , the son of Zerubbabel , the son of Shealtiel , the son of Neri ,
The son of Melchi , the son of Addi , the son of Cosam , the son of Elmadam , the son of Er ,
The son of Jesus , the son of Eliezer , the son of Jorim , the son of Matthat , the son of Levi ,
The son of Symeon , the son of Judas , the son of Joseph , the son of Jonam , the son of Eliakim ,
The son of Melea , the son of Menna , the son of Mattatha , the son of Nathan , the son of David ,
The son of Jesse , the son of Obed , the son of Boaz , the son of Salmon , the son of Nahshon ,
The son of Amminadab , the son of Arni , the son of Hezron , the son of Perez , the son of Judah ,
The son of Jacob , the son of Isaac , the son of Abraham , the son of Terah , the son of Nahor ,
The son of Serug , the son of Reu , the son of Peleg , the son of Eber , the son of Shelah ,
The son of Cainan , the son of Arphaxad , the son of Shem , the son of Noah , the son of Lamech ,
The son of Methuselah , the son of Enoch , the son of Jared , the son of Mahalaleel , the son of Cainan ,
The son of Enos , the son of Seth , the son of Adam , the son of God .
And Jesus , full of the Holy Spirit , came back from the Jordan , and was guided by the Spirit in the waste land
For forty days , being tested by the Evil One . And he had no food in those days ; and when they came to an end , he was in need of food .
And the Evil One said to him , If you are the Son of God , give orders to this stone to become bread .
And Jesus made answer to him , It has been said in the Writings , Bread is not man's only need .
And he took him up and let him see all the kingdoms of the earth in a minute of time .
And the Evil One said , I will give you authority over all these , and the glory of them , for it has been given to me , and I give it to anyone at my pleasure .
If then you will give worship to me , it will all be yours .
And Jesus in answer said to him , It has been said in the Writings , Give worship to the Lord your God , and be his servant only .
And he took him to Jerusalem and put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him , If you are the Son of God , let yourself go down from here ; for it is said in the Writings ,
He will give his angels orders to take care of you :
And , In their hands they will keep you up , so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone .
And Jesus made answer and said to him , It is said in the Writings , You may not put the Lord your God to the test .
And when all these tests were ended the Evil One went away from him for a time .
And Jesus came back to Galilee in the power of the Spirit , and the news of him went through all the country round about .
And he was teaching in their Synagogues and all men gave him praise .
And he came to Nazareth , where he had been as a child , and he went , as his way was , into the Synagogue on the Sabbath , and got up to give a reading .
And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him and , opening the book , he came on the place where it is said ,
The Spirit of the Lord is on me , because I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor ; he has sent me to make well those who are broken-hearted ; to say that the prisoners will be let go , and the blind will see , and to make the wounded free from their chains ,
To give knowledge that the year of the Lord's good pleasure is come .
And shutting the book he gave it back to the servant and took his seat : and the eyes of all in the Synagogue were fixed on him .
Then he said to them , Today this word has come true in your hearing .
And they were all giving witness , with wonder , to the words of grace which came from his mouth : and they said , Is not this the son of Joseph ?
And he said to them , Without doubt you will say to me , Let the medical man make himself well : the things which to our knowledge were done at Capernaum , do them here in your country .
And he said to them , Truly I say to you , No prophet is honoured in his country .
Truly I say to you , There were a number of widows in Israel in the days of Elijah , when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months and there was no food in the land ;
But Elijah was not sent to one of them , but only to Zarephath , in the land of Sidon , to a woman who was a widow .
And there were a number of lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet , and not one of them was made clean , but only Naaman the Syrian .
And all who were in the Synagogue were very angry when these things were said to them .
And they got up and took him out of the town to the edge of the mountain on which their town was , so that they might send him down to his death .
But he came through them and went on his way .
And he came down to Capernaum , a town of Galilee ; and he was giving them teaching on the Sabbath .
And they were surprised at his teaching , for his word was with authority .
And there was a man in the Synagogue who had an unclean spirit ; and he gave a loud cry and said ,
Let us be ! what have we to do with you , Jesus of Nazareth ? have you come to put an end to us ? I have knowledge who you are , the Holy One of God .
And Jesus said to him , Be quiet , and come out of him . And when the evil spirit had put him down on the earth in the middle of them , he came out of him , having done him no damage .
And wonder came on them all and they said to one another , What are these words ? for with authority and power he gives orders to the evil spirits and they come out .
And there was much talk about him in all the places round about .
And he got up and went out of the Synagogue and went into the house of Simon . And Simon's wife's mother was very ill with a burning heat ; and in answer to their prayers for her .
He went near her , and with a sharp word he gave orders to the disease and it went away from her ; and straight away she got up and took care of their needs .
And at sundown all those who had anyone ill with any sort of disease , took them to him , and he put his hands on every one of them and made them well .
And evil spirits came out of a number of them , crying out and saying , You are the Son of God . But he gave them sharp orders not to say a word , because they had knowledge that he was the Christ .
And when it was day , he came out and went to a waste place ; and great numbers of people came looking for him , and they came to him and would have kept him from going away .
But he said to them , I have to give the good news of the kingdom of God in other towns , because that is why I was sent .
And he was teaching in the Synagogues of Galilee .
Now it came about that while the people came pushing to be near him , and to have knowledge of the word of God , he was by a wide stretch of water named Gennesaret ;
And he saw two boats by the edge of the water , but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets .
And he got into one of the boats , the property of Simon , and made a request to him to go a little way out from the land . And being seated he gave the people teaching from the boat .
And when his talk was ended , he said to Simon , Go out into deep water , and let down your nets for fish .
And Simon , answering , said , Master , we were working all night and we took nothing : but at your word I will let down the nets .
And when they had done this , they got such a great number of fish that it seemed as if their nets would be broken ;
And they made signs to their friends in the other boat to come to their help . And they came , and the two boats were so full that they were going down .
But Simon , when he saw it , went down at the knees of Jesus and said , Go away from me , O Lord , for I am a sinner .
For he was full of wonder and so were all those who were with him , at the number of fish which they had taken ;
And so were James and John , the sons of Zebedee , who were working with Simon . And Jesus said to Simon , Have no fear ; from this time forward you will be a fisher of men .
And when they had got their boats to the land , they gave up everything and went after him .
And it came about that while he was in one of the towns , there was a leper there : and when he saw Jesus he went down on his face in prayer to him , saying , Lord , if it is your pleasure , you have power to make me clean .
And he put out his hand to him and said , It is my pleasure ; be clean . And straight away his disease went from him .
And he gave him orders : Say nothing to any man , but let the priest see you and give an offering so that you may be made clean , as the law of Moses says , and for a witness to them .
But news of him went out all the more , in every direction , and great numbers of people came together to give hearing to his words and to be made well from their diseases .
But he went away by himself to a waste place for prayer .
And it came about that on one of these days he was teaching ; and some Pharisees and teachers of the law were seated there , who had come from every town of Galilee and Judaea and from Jerusalem ; and the power of the Lord was with him , to make those who were ill free from their diseases .
And some men had with them , on a bed , a man who was ill , without power of moving ; and they made attempts to get him in and put him before Jesus .
And because of the mass of people , there was no way to get him in ; so they went up on the top of the house and let him down through the roof , on his bed , into the middle in front of Jesus .
And seeing their faith he said , Man , you have forgiveness for your sins .
And the scribes and Pharisees were having an argument , saying , Who is this , who has no respect for God ? who is able to give forgiveness for sins , but God only ?
But Jesus , who had knowledge of their thoughts , said to them , Why are you reasoning in your hearts ?
Which is the simpler : to say , You have forgiveness for your sins ; or to say , Get up and go ?
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins , (he said to the man who was ill ,) I say to you , Get up , and take up your bed , and go into your house .
And straight away he got up before them , and took up his bed and went away to his house giving praise to God .
And wonder overcame them all , and they gave glory to God ; and they were full of fear , saying , We have seen strange things today .
And after these things he went out , and saw Levi , a tax-farmer , seated at the place where taxes were taken , and said to him , Come after me .
And giving up his business , he got up and went after him .
And Levi made a great feast for him in his house : and a great number of tax-farmers and others were seated at table with them .
And the Pharisees and their scribes made protests against his disciples , saying , Why do you take food and drink with tax-farmers and sinners ?
And Jesus , answering , said to them , Those who are well have no need of a medical man , but those who are ill .
I have come , not to get the upright , but sinners , so that they may be turned from their sins .
And they said to him , The disciples of John frequently go without food , and make prayers , and so do the disciples of the Pharisees ; but your disciples take food and drink .
And Jesus said , Are you able to make the friends of the newly-married man go without food when he is with them ?
But the days will come when he will be taken away from them , and then they will go without food .
And he said to them , in a story , No man takes a bit of cloth from a new coat and puts it on to an old coat , for so the new coat would be damaged and the bit from the new would not go well with the old .
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins , for fear that the skins will be burst by the new wine , and the wine be let out , and the skins come to destruction .
But new wine has to be put into new wine-skins .
And no man , having had old wine , has any desire for new , for he says , The old is better .
Now it came about that on the Sabbath he was going through the fields of grain , and his disciples took the heads of the grain for food , crushing them in their hands .
But some of the Pharisees said , Why do you do what it is not right to do on the Sabbath ?
And Jesus said , Have you not seen in the Writings what David did when he was in need of food , he , and those who were with him ;
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread , which only the priests may take , and gave it to those who were with him ?
And he said , The Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath .
And it came about , on another Sabbath , that he went into the Synagogue and was teaching there . And a man was there whose right hand was dead .
And the scribes and Pharisees were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath , so that they might be able to say something against him .
But he had knowledge of their thoughts ; and he said to the man whose hand was dead , Get up and come into the middle . And he got up and came forward .
And Jesus said , I put the question to you , Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil ? to give life or to take it away ?
And looking round on all of them , he said to him , Put out your hand . And he did so : and his hand was made well .
But they were full of wrath , and were talking together about what they might do to Jesus .
And it came about in those days that he went out to the mountain for prayer ; and he was all night in prayer to God .
And the day came and , turning to his disciples , he made a selection from among them of twelve , to whom he gave the name of Apostles ;
Simon , to whom he gave the name of Peter , and Andrew , his brother , and James and John and Philip and Bartholomew
And Matthew and Thomas and James , the son of Alphaeus , and Simon , who was named the Zealot ,
And Judas , the son of James , and Judas Iscariot , he who was false to him .
And he came down with them to a level place , and a great band of his disciples , and a very great number of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem and from the parts of Tyre and Sidon by the sea , came to give hearing to him , and to be made well from their diseases ;
And those who were troubled with unclean spirits were made well .
And all the people were desiring to be touched by him , for power came from him and made them all well .
And turning his eyes to his disciples he said , Happy are you who are poor : for the kingdom of God is yours .
Happy are you who are in need of food now : for you will be made full . Happy are you who are weeping now ; for you will be glad .
Happy are you , when men have hate for you , and put you away from among them and say angry words to you , turning away in disgust at your name , because of the Son of man .
Be glad in that day , and be lifted up for joy , for your reward in heaven will be great : for their fathers did these same things to the prophets .
But unhappy are you who have wealth : for you have been comforted now .
Unhappy are you who are full of food now : for you will be in need . Unhappy are you who are laughing now : for you will be crying in sorrow .
Unhappy are you when all men give you their approval : for so their fathers did to the false prophets .
But I say to you who give ear to me , Have love for those who are against you , do good to those who have hate for you ,
Give blessing to those who give you curses , say prayers for those who are cruel to you .
If a man gives you a blow on one side of your face , then let the other side be turned to him ; from him who takes away your coat , do not keep back your robe .
Give to everyone who comes with a request , and if a man takes away your property , make no attempt to get it back again .
Do to others as you would have them do to you .
If you have love for those who have love for you , what credit is it to you ? for even sinners have love for those who have love for them .
And if you do good to those who do good to you , what credit is it to you ? for even sinners do the same .
And if you let those have the use of your money , from whom you are hoping to get it back , what credit is it to you ? even sinners do so to sinners , hoping to get back as much as they gave .
But be loving to those who are against you and do them good , and give them your money , not giving up hope , and your reward will be great and you will be the sons of the Most High : for he is kind to evil men , and to those who have hard hearts .
Be full of pity , even as your Father is full of pity .
Be not judges of others , and you will not be judged : do not give punishment to others , and you will not get punishment yourselves : make others free , and you will be made free :
Give , and it will be given to you ; good measure , crushed down , full and running over , they will give to you . For in the same measure as you give , it will be given to you again .
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story , saying , Is it possible for one blind man to be guide to another ? will they not go falling together into a hole ?
The disciple is not greater than his master , but everyone whose learning is complete will be like his master .
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye , but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye ?
How will you say to your brother , Brother , let me take the grain of dust out of your eye , when you yourself do not see the bit of wood in your eye ? O false one ! first take the wood out of your eye and then you will see clearly to take the dust out of your brother's eye .
For no good tree gives bad fruit , and no bad tree gives good fruit .
For every tree is judged by its fruit . Men do not get figs from thorns , or grapes from blackberry plants .
The good man , out of the good store of his heart , gives good things ; and the evil man , out of his evil store , gives evil : for out of the full store of the heart come the words of the mouth .
Why do you say to me , Lord , Lord , and do not the things which I say ?
Everyone who comes to me and gives ear to my words and does them , I will make clear to you what he is like :
He is like a man building a house , who went deep and put the base of it on a rock ; and when the water came up and the river was driving against that house , it was not moved , because the building was good .
But he who gives hearing , without doing , is like a man building a house on the earth without a base for it ; and when the force of the river came against it , straight away it came down ; and the destruction of that house was great .
After he had come to the end of all his words in the hearing of the people , he went into Capernaum .
And a certain captain had a servant who was very dear to him ; this servant was ill and near to death .
And when news of Jesus came to his ears , he sent to him rulers of the Jews , requesting that he would come and make his servant well .
And they , when they came to Jesus , made their request warmly , saying ,
It is right for you to do this for him , because he is a friend to our nation , and himself has put up a Synagogue for us .
And Jesus went with them . And when he was not far from the house , the man sent friends to him , saying , Lord , do not give yourself trouble : for I am not important enough for you to come into my house :
And I had the feeling that I was not even good enough to come to you : but say the word only , and my servant will be well .
For I , myself , am a man under authority , having men under me ; and I say to this one , Go , and he goes ; and to another , Come , and he comes ; and to my servant , Do this , and he does it .
And when these things were said to Jesus , he was surprised , and , turning to the mass of people coming after him , said , I have not seen such great faith , no , not in Israel .
And when those who were sent came back to the house they saw that the servant was well .
And it came about , after a little time , that he went to a town named Nain ; and his disciples went with him , and a great number of people .
Now when he came near the door of the town , a dead man was being taken out , the only son of his mother , who was a widow : and a great number of people from the town were with her .
And when the Lord saw her , he had pity on her and said to her , Be not sad .
And he came near , and put his hand on the stretcher where the dead man was : and those who were moving it came to a stop . And he said , Young man , I say to you , Get up .
And the dead man got up , and words came from his lips . And he gave him to his mother .
And fear came on all , and they gave praise to God , saying , A great prophet is among us : and , God has given thought to his people .
And this story about him went through all Judaea and the places round about .
And the disciples of John gave him an account of all these things .
Then John sent two of his disciples to the Lord , saying , Are you he who is to come , or are we waiting for another ?
And when the men came to him they said , John the Baptist has sent us to you , saying , Are you he who is to come , or are we waiting for another ?
At that time , he made a number of people free from their diseases and their pains , and from evil spirits ; and to others who were blind he gave back the use of their eyes .
And answering them he said , Go back and give news to John of what you have seen , and the things which have come to your ears ; the blind now see , those who had no power in their legs are walking , lepers are made clean , those who had no hearing now have their ears open , dead men come to life again , and the poor have the good news given to them .
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me .
And when the men who were sent by John had gone away , he said to the people , about John , What did you go out into the waste land to see ? a tall stem moving in the wind ?
But what did you go out to see ? a man in soft clothing ? See now , those who have beautiful clothing and delicate food are in kings' houses .
But what did you go out to see ? a prophet ? Yes , I say to you , and more than a prophet .
This is he of whom it has been said , See , I send my servant before your face , who will make ready your way before you .
I say to you , Among all the sons of women , not one is greater than John : but he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he .
(And all the people , and the tax-farmers , to whom John had given baptism , when they had knowledge of these things , gave glory to God .
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were against the purpose of God for themselves , not having had his baptism .)
What comparison am I to make of the men of this generation ? what are they like ?
They are like children who are seated in the market-place , crying out to one another , and saying , We made music for you , but you did not take part in the dance ; we gave cries of sorrow , but you were not sad .
For John the Baptist came , taking no food or drink , and you say , He has an evil spirit .
The Son of man came feasting , and you say , Here is a lover of food and wine , a friend of tax-farmers and sinners .
But wisdom is judged to be right by all her children .
And one of the Pharisees made a request that he would take a meal with him . And he went into the Pharisee's house and took his seat at the table .
And there was a woman in the town who was a sinner ; and when she had news that he was a guest in the Pharisee's house , she took a bottle of perfume ,
And went in and took her place at the back of him , near his feet , weeping , so that his feet were washed with the drops from her eyes , and with her hair she made them dry , and kissing his feet she put the perfume on them .
Now when the Pharisee in whose house he was saw it , he said to himself , This man , if he was a prophet , would be conscious what sort of woman this is who has put her hands on him , that she is a sinner .
And Jesus , answering , said , Simon , I have something to say to you . And he said , Master , say on .
And he said , Two men were in debt to a certain man of business : one had a debt of five hundred pence , and the other of fifty .
When they were unable to make payment , he made the two of them free of their debts . Which of them , now , will have the greater love for him ?
Simon , in answer , said , It seems he whose debt was greater . And he said , Your decision is right .
And turning to the woman he said to Simon , You see this woman ? I came into your house ; you did not give me water for my feet : but she has been washing my feet with the drops from her eyes , and drying them with her hair .
You did not give me a kiss : but she , from the time when I came in , has gone on kissing my feet .
You put no oil on my head : but she has put perfume on my feet .
And so I say to you , She will have forgiveness for her sins which are great in number , because of her great love : but he who has small need of forgiveness gives little love .
And he said to her , You have forgiveness for your sins .
And those who were seated at table with him said to themselves , Who is this who even gives forgiveness of sins ?
And he said to the woman , By your faith you have salvation ; go in peace .
And it came about , after a short time , that he went through town and country giving the good news of the kingdom of God , and with him were the twelve ,
And certain women who had been made free from evil spirits and diseases , Mary named Magdalene , from whom seven evil spirits had gone out ,
And Joanna , the wife of Chuza , Herod's chief house-servant , and Susanna and a number of others , who gave him of their wealth for his needs .
And when a great number of people came together , and men from every town went out to him , he gave them teaching in the form of a story :
A man went out to put in seed , and while he was doing it , some was dropped by the wayside and it was crushed under foot , and was taken by the birds of heaven .
And some went on the rock , and when it came up it became dry and dead because it had no water .
And some went among thorns , and the thorns came up with it and it had no room for growth .
And some falling on good earth , came up and gave fruit a hundred times as much . And with these words he said in a loud voice , He who has ears , let him give ear .
And his disciples put questions to him about the point of the story .
And he said , To you is given knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of God ; but to the others , they are given in stories , so that seeing , they may not see , and though they give hearing , the sense will not be clear to them .
Now this is the point of the story : The seed is the word of God .
Those by the side of the road are those who have given hearing ; then the Evil One comes and takes away the word from their hearts , so that they may not have faith and get salvation .
And those on the rock are those who with joy give hearing to the word ; but having no root , they have faith for a time , and when the test comes they give up .
And those which went among thorns are those who have given hearing , and go on their way , but they are overcome by cares and wealth and the pleasures of life , and they give no fruit .
And those in the good earth are those who , having given ear to the word , keep it with a good and true heart , and in quiet strength give fruit .
No man , when the light is lighted , puts a cover over it , or puts it under a bed , but he puts it on its table , so that those who come in may see the light .
For nothing is put out of view which will not be made clear , and nothing is secret of which the knowledge will not come to light .
So take care how you give hearing , for to him who has will be given , and from him who has not will be taken even what he seems to have .
And his mother and his brothers came to him , and they were not able to get near him because of the great number of people .
And someone said to him , Your mother and your brothers are outside desiring to see you .
But he said to them in answer , My mother and my brothers are those who have knowledge of the word of God and do it .
Now it came about on one of those days that he got into a boat with his disciples ; and he said to them , Let us go over to the other side of the water : and they put out the boat .
But while they were sailing he went to sleep : and a storm of wind came down on the sea , and the boat became full of water and they were in danger .
Then they came to him and , awaking him out of his sleep , said , Master , Master , destruction is near . And he , when he was awake , gave orders to the wind and the rolling waves , and the storm came to an end , and all was calm .
And he said to them , Where is your faith ? And fear and wonder overcame them , and they said to one another , Who then is this , who gives orders even to the winds and the water and they do what he says ?
And they came to the country of the Gerasenes , which is opposite Galilee .
And when he had come to the land , there came to him a certain man from the town who had evil spirits ; and for a long time he had had no clothing on , and was not living in a house but in the place of the dead .
And when he saw Jesus , he gave a loud cry and went down on the earth before him and in a loud voice said , What have I to do with you , Jesus , Son of the Most High God ? Do not be cruel to me .
For he gave an order to the evil spirit to come out of the man . For frequently it would take a grip of him : and he was kept under control , and prisoned with chains ; but parting the chains in two , he would be sent by the driving of the evil spirit into waste places .
And Jesus said to him , What is your name ? And he said , Legion ; for a number of spirits had gone into him .
And they made a request to him that he would not give them an order to go away into the deep .
Now there was a great herd of pigs in that place , getting food on the mountain : and the evil spirits made a request to him that he would let them go into the pigs , and he let them .
And the evil spirits came out of the man and went into the pigs : and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the water and came to destruction .
And when the men who took care of them saw what had come about , they went quickly and gave news of it in the town and the country .
And they went out to see what had taken place , and they came to Jesus and saw the man out of whom the evil spirits had gone , seated , clothed and with full use of his senses , at the feet of Jesus ; and fear came on them .
And those who had seen it gave them an account of how the man who had the evil spirits was made well .
And all the people of the country of the Gerasenes made a request to him to go away from them ; for they were in great fear : and he got into a boat and went back .
But the man from whom the evil spirits had gone out had a great desire to be with him , but he sent him away , saying ,
Go back to your house and let them have news of all the great things which God has done for you . And he went away , giving word through all the town of the great things which Jesus had done for him .
And when Jesus went back , the people were glad to see him , for they were all waiting for him .
Then there came a man named Jairus , who was a ruler in the Synagogue : and he went down at the feet of Jesus , desiring him to come to his house ;
For he had an only daughter , about twelve years old , and she was near to death . But while he was on his way , the people were pushing to be near him .
And a woman , who had had a flow of blood for twelve years , and had given all her money to medical men , and not one of them was able to make her well ,
Came after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe , and straight away the flowing of her blood was stopped .
And Jesus said , Who was touching me ? And when they all said , It is not I , Peter and those who were with him said , Master , the people are pushing round you on every side .
But Jesus said , Someone was touching me , for I had the feeling that power had gone out from me .
And when the woman saw that she was not able to keep it secret , she came , shaking with fear , and falling down before him she made clear before all the people the reason for her touching him , and how she was made well straight away .
And he said to her , Daughter , your faith has made you well ; go in peace .
While he was still talking , someone came from the house of the ruler of the Synagogue , saying , Your daughter is dead ; do not go on troubling the Master .
But Jesus at these words said to him , Have no fear , only have faith , and she will be made well .
And when he came to the house he did not let any man go in with him , but only Peter and John and James , and the father of the girl and her mother .
And all the people were weeping and crying for her ; but he said , Do not be sad , for she is not dead , but sleeping .
And they were laughing at him , being certain that she was dead .
But he , taking her hand , said to her , My child , get up .
And her spirit came back to her and she got up straight away : and he gave orders that food was to be given to her .
And her father and mother were full of wonder , but he gave orders to them to say nothing about it to anyone .
And getting the twelve together , he gave them power and authority over all evil spirits and over diseases , to make them well .
And he sent them out to be preachers of the kingdom of God , and to make well those who were ill .
And he said to them , Take nothing for your journey , no stick or bag or bread or money , and do not take two coats .
And if you go into a house , let that house be your resting-place till you go away .
And if any people will not take you in , when you go away from that town , put off its dust from your feet for a witness against them .
And they went away , journeying through all the towns , preaching the good news and making people free from diseases in all places .
Now Herod the king had news of all these things : and he was in doubt , because it was said by some people that John had come back from the dead ;
And by some , that Elijah had come ; and by others , that one of the old prophets had come back to life .
And Herod said , I put John to death : but who is this , of whom such stories are given to me ? And he had a desire to see him .
And the twelve , when they came back , gave him an account of what they had done . And he took them with him and went away from the people to a town named Beth-saida .
But the people , getting news of it , went after him : and he was pleased to see them , and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God , and made those well who were in need of it .
And the day went on ; and the twelve came to him and said , Send these people away so that they may go into the towns and the country round about and get resting-places and food for themselves , for we are in a waste place .
But he said , Give them food yourselves . And they said , We have only five cakes of bread and two fishes , if we do not go and get food for all these people .
For there were about five thousand men . And he said to his disciples , Make them be seated in groups , about fifty to a group .
And they did so , and made them all be seated .
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and , looking up to heaven , he said words of blessing over them , and when they had been broken , he gave them to the disciples to give to the people .
And they all took the food and had enough ; and they took up of the broken bits which were over , twelve baskets full .
And it came about that when he was in prayer , by himself , and the disciples were with him , he put a question to them , saying , Who do the people say I am ?
And they , answering , said , John the Baptist ; but others say Elijah ; and others , that one of the old prophets has come back .
And he said , But who do you say that I am ? And Peter , answering , said , The Christ of God .
But he gave them special orders , not to say this to any man ;
Saying , The Son of man will undergo much and be put on one side by the rulers and the chief priests and the teachers of the law , and be put to death , and on the third day he will come back to life .
And he said to them all , If any man has a desire to come after me , let him give up all , and take up his cross every day , and come after me .
For whoever has a desire to keep his life will have it taken from him , but whoever gives up his life because of me , will keep it .
For what profit will a man have if he gets all the world , but undergoes loss or destruction himself ?
For if any man has a feeling of shame because of me or of my words , the Son of man will have shame because of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels .
But truly I say to you , Some of those who are here now will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God .
And about eight days after he had said these things , he took Peter and John and James with him and went up into the mountain for prayer .
And while he was in prayer , his face was changed and his clothing became white and shining .
And two men , Moses and Elijah , were talking with him ;
Who were seen in glory and were talking of his death which was about to take place in Jerusalem .
Now Peter and those who were with him were overcome with sleep : but when they were fully awake , they saw his glory and the two men who were with him .
And when they were about to go away from him , Peter said to Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here ; let us make three tents , one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah : having no knowledge of what he was saying .
And while he said these things , the shade of a cloud came over them , and they were full of fear when they went into the cloud .
And there was a voice from the cloud saying , This is my Son , the man of my selection ; give ear to him .
And after the voice was gone they saw that Jesus was by himself . And they kept quiet , and said nothing at that time to anyone of the things which they had seen .
And on the day after , when they came down from the mountain , a great band of people came to him .
And a man from among them , crying out , said , Master , I make a request to you , give a thought to my son , for he is my only child :
And see , a spirit takes him , and suddenly he gives a cry , twisted in pain and streaming at the lips , and when it goes away from him at last , he is marked as from blows .
And I made a request to your disciples to send it out of him , but they were not able to do it .
And Jesus said , O generation without faith and false in heart , how long will I have to be with you and put up with you ? let your son come here .
And while he was coming , he was pushed violently down and twisted by the evil spirit . But Jesus gave sharp orders to the unclean spirit , and made the boy well , and gave him back to his father .
And they were full of wonder at the great power of God . But while they were all wondering at all the things which he did , he said to his disciples ,
Let these words go deep into your ears , for the Son of man will be given up into the hands of men .
But this saying was not clear to them and its sense was kept secret from them so that they were not able to see it : and they had fear of questioning him about it .
Now there was a discussion among them about which of them would be the greatest .
But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their hearts , he took a small child and put him by his side ,
And said to them , Whoever gives honour to this child in my name , gives honour to me : and whoever gives honour to me , gives honour to him who sent me : for whoever is least among you all , that man is great .
And John , answering , said , Master , we saw a man driving out evil spirits in your name , and we did not let him do it , because he was not one of us .
But Jesus said to him , Let him do it , for he who is not against you is for you .
And it came about that when the days were near for him to be taken up , his face was turned to go to Jerusalem ,
And he sent men before : and they came to a small town of Samaria to make ready for him .
But they would not have him there , because he was clearly going to Jerusalem .
And when his disciples , James and John , saw this , they said , Lord , may we send fire from heaven and put an end to them ?
But turning round he said sharp words to them .
And they went to another small town .
And when they were on the way , a certain man said to him , I will come after you wherever you go .
And Jesus said to him , Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have resting-places , but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head .
And he said to another , Come after me . But he said , Lord , let me first go and give the last honours to my father .
But he said to him , Let the dead take care of their dead ; it is for you to go and give news of the kingdom of God .
And another man said , I will come with you , Lord , but first let me say a last good-day to those who are at my house .
But Jesus said , No man , having put his hand to the plough and looking back , is good enough for the kingdom of God .
Now after these things , the Lord made selection of seventy others and sent them before him , two together , into every town and place where he himself was about to come .
And he said to them , There is much grain ready to be cut , but not enough workers : so make prayer to the Lord of the grain-fields that he will send workers to get in the grain .
Go on your way : see , I send you out like lambs among wolves .
Take no bag for money or for food , and no shoes ; say no word to any man on the way .
And whenever you go into a house , first say , Peace be to this house .
And if a son of peace is there , your peace will be with him : but if not , it will come back to you again .
And keep in that same house , taking what food and drink they give you : for the worker has a right to his reward . Do not go from house to house .
And into whatever town you go , if they take you in , take whatever food is given to you :
And make well those in it who are ill and say to them , The kingdom of God is near to you .
But if you go into a town where they will not have you , go out into the streets of it and say ,
Even the dust of your town , which is on our feet , we put off as a witness against you ; but be certain of this , that the kingdom of God is near .
I say to you , It will be better in that day for Sodom than for that town .
A curse is on you , Chorazin ! A curse is on you , Beth-saida ! For if such works of power had been done in Tyre and Sidon as have been done in you , they would have been turned from their sins , in days gone by , seated in the dust .
But it will be better for Tyre and Sidon , in the day of judging , than for you .
And you , Capernaum , were you not lifted up to heaven ? you will go down to hell .
Whoever gives ear to you , gives ear to me ; and whoever is against you , is against me ; and whoever is against me , is against him who sent me .
And the seventy came back with joy , saying , Lord , even the evil spirits are under our power in your name .
And he said , I was watching for Satan , falling from heaven like a star .
See , I have given you power to put your feet on snakes and evil beasts , and over all the strength of him who is against you : and nothing will do you damage .
Do not be glad , however , because you have power over spirits , but because your names are recorded in heaven .
In that same hour he was full of joy in the Holy Spirit and said , I give praise to you , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning , and have made them clear to little children : for so , O Father , it was pleasing in your eyes .
All things have been given to me by my Father : and no one has knowledge of the Son , but only the Father : and of the Father , but only the Son , and he to whom the Son will make it clear .
And , turning to the disciples , he said privately , Happy are the eyes which see the things you see :
For I say to you that numbers of prophets and kings have had a desire to see the things which you see , and have not seen them , and to have knowledge of the things which have come to your ears , and they had it not .
And a certain teacher of the law got up and put him to the test , saying , Master , what have I to do so that I may have eternal life ?
And he said to him , What does the law say ? in your reading of it ?
And he , answering , said , Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind ; and for your neighbour as for yourself .
And he said , You have given the right answer : do this and you will have life .
But he , desiring to put himself in the right , said to Jesus , And who is my neighbour ?
And Jesus , answering him , said , A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho , and he got into the hands of thieves , who took his clothing and gave him cruel blows , and when they went away , he was half dead .
And by chance a certain priest was going down that way : and when he saw him , he went by on the other side .
And in the same way , a Levite , when he came to the place and saw him , went by on the other side .
But a certain man of Samaria , journeying that way , came where he was , and when he saw him , he was moved with pity for him ,
And came to him and put clean linen round his wounds , with oil and wine ; and he put him on his beast and took him to a house and took care of him .
And the day after he took two pennies and gave them to the owner of the house and said , Take care of him ; and if this money is not enough , when I come again I will give you whatever more is needed .
Which of these three men , in your opinion , was neighbour to the man who came into the hands of thieves ?
And he said , The one who had mercy on him . And Jesus said , Go and do the same .
Now , while they were on their way , he came to a certain town ; and a woman named Martha took him into her house .
And she had a sister , by name Mary , who took her seat at the Lord's feet and gave attention to his words .
But Martha had her hands full of the work of the house , and she came to him and said , Lord , is it nothing to you that my sister has let me do all the work ? Say to her that she is to give me some help .
But the Lord , answering , said to her , Martha , Martha , you are full of care and troubled about such a number of things :
Little is needed , or even one thing only : for Mary has taken that good part , which will not be taken away from her .
And it came about that he was in prayer in a certain place , and when he came to an end , one of his disciples said to him , Lord , will you give us teaching about prayer , as John did to his disciples ?
And he said to them , When you say your prayers , say , Father , may your name be kept holy and your kingdom come .
Give us every day bread for our needs .
May we have forgiveness for our sins , as we make free all those who are in debt to us . And let us not be put to the test .
And he said to them , Which of you , having a friend , would go to him in the middle of the night and say to him , Friend , let me have three cakes of bread ;
Because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey , and I have nothing to put before him ;
And he , from inside the house , would say in answer , Do not be a trouble to me ; the door is now shut , and my children are with me in bed ; it is not possible for me to get up and give to you ?
I say to you , Though he will not get up and give to him , because he is his friend , still , if he keeps on making his request , he will get up and give him as much as he has need of .
And I say to you , Make requests , and they will be answered ; what you are searching for , you will get ; when you give the sign , the door will be open to you .
For to everyone who makes a request , it will be given ; and he who is searching will get his desire ; and to him who gives the sign , the door will be open .
And which of you , being a father , will give a stone to his son , who makes request for bread ? or for a fish , will give him a snake ?
Or for an egg , will give him a scorpion ?
If , then , you who are evil are able to give good things to your children , how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who make request to him ?
And he was sending an evil spirit out of a man who was without the power of talking . And it came about that when the spirit had gone the man had the power of talking ; and the people were full of wonder .
But some of them said , He sends out evil spirits by Beelzebul , the ruler of evil spirits .
And others , testing him , were looking for a sign from heaven from him .
But he , having knowledge of their thoughts , said to them , Every kingdom in which there is division is made waste ; and a house in which there is division comes to destruction .
If , then , Satan is at war with himself , how will he keep his kingdom ? because you say that I send evil spirits out of men by the help of Beelzebul .
And if I , by Beelzebul , send out evil spirits , by whose help do your sons send them out ? so let them be your judges .
But if I , by the finger of God , send out evil spirits , then the kingdom of God has overtaken you .
When the strong man armed keeps watch over his house , then his goods are safe :
But when one who is stronger makes an attack on him and overcomes him , he takes away his instruments of war , in which he had put his faith , and makes division of his goods .
He who is not with me is against me , and he who will not give me help in getting people together is driving them away .
The unclean spirit , when he has gone out of a man , goes through dry places , looking for rest ; and when he does not get it , he says , I will go back to my house from which I came .
And when he comes , he sees that it has been made fair and clean .
Then he goes and gets seven other spirits more evil than himself , and they go in , and take their places there : and the last condition of that man is worse than the first .
And it came about that when he said these things , a certain woman among the people said in a loud voice , Happy is the body which gave you birth , and the breasts from which you took milk .
But he said , More happy are they who give hearing to the word of God and keep it .
And when a great number of people came together to him , he said , This generation is an evil generation : it is looking for a sign and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah .
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites , so will the Son of man be to this generation .
The queen of the South will come up on the day of judging and give her decision against the men of this generation : for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon ; and now something greater than Solomon is here .
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation : for they were turned away from their sins at the preaching of Jonah ; but now something greater than Jonah is here .
No man , when the light has been lighted , puts it in a secret place , or under a vessel , but on its table , so that those who come in may see the light .
The light of the body is the eye : when your eye is true , all your body is full of light ; but when it is evil , your body is dark .
So take care that the light which is in you is not dark .
If , then , all your body is light , with no part of it dark , it will be completely full of light , as when a flame with its bright shining gives you light .
Now , while he was talking , a Pharisee made a request that he would come to a meal with him ; and he went in and took his seat at the meal .
And when the Pharisee saw it , he was surprised because he came to the meal without first washing himself .
And the Lord said to him , You Pharisees make the outside of the cup and the plate clean ; but inside you are thieves and full of evil .
O you foolish ones ! did not he who made the outside in the same way make the inside ?
But if you give to the poor such things as you are able , then all things are clean to you .
But a curse is on you , Pharisees ! for you make men give a tenth of every sort of plant , and give no thought to right and the love of God ; but it is right for you to do these things , and not let the others be undone .
A curse is on you , Pharisees ! for your desires are for the most important seats in the Synagogues and for words of respect said to you in the market-place .
A curse is on you ! for you are like the resting-places of dead men , which are not seen , and men go walking over them without knowledge of it .
And one of the teachers of the law , answering , said to him , Master , in saying this , you give a bad name to us as to them .
And he said , A curse is on you , teachers of the law ! for while other men are crushed under the weight of the rules you make for them , you yourselves do not put so much as one finger to them .
A curse is on you ! for you make resting-places for the bodies of the prophets , but your fathers put them to death .
So you are witnesses and give approval to the work of your fathers ; for they put them to death and you make their last resting-places .
For this reason the wisdom of God has said , I will send them prophets and teachers , and to some of them they will give death and cruel pains ;
So that punishment may come on this generation for the blood of all the prophets which was given from the earliest days ;
From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah , who was put to death between the altar and the Temple . Yes , I say to you , It will come on this generation .
A curse is on you , teachers of the law ! for you have taken away the key of knowledge : you did not go in yourselves , and you got in the way of those who were going in .
And when he had come out of that place , the scribes and the Pharisees came round him angrily , questioning him about more things ;
And watching him , for a chance to get something from his words which might be used against him .
At that time , when thousands of the people had come together , in such numbers that they were crushing one another , he said first to his disciples , Have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees , which is deceit .
But nothing is covered up , which will not come to light , or secret , which will not be made clear .
So , whatever you have said in the dark , will come to men's hearing in the light , and what you have said secretly inside the house , will be made public from the house-tops .
And I say to you , my friends , Have no fear of those who may put the body to death , and are able to do no more than that .
But I will make clear to you of whom you are to be in fear : of him who after death has power to send you to hell ; yes , truly I say , Have fear of him .
Are not five sparrows given in exchange for two farthings ? and God has every one of them in mind .
But even the hairs of your head are numbered . Have no fear : you are of more value than a flock of sparrows .
And I say to you that to everyone who gives witness to me before men , the Son of man will give witness before the angels of God .
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me , I will say that I have no knowledge of him before the angels of God .
And if anyone says a word against the Son of man , he will have forgiveness : but for him who says evil words against the Holy Spirit , there will be no forgiveness .
And when they take you before the Synagogues and the authorities and the rulers , take no thought about what answers you will give , or what you will say :
For the Holy Spirit will make clear to you in that very hour what to say .
And one of the people said to him , Master , give an order to my brother to make division of the heritage with me .
But he said , Man , who made me a judge or a maker of decisions for you ?
And he said to them , Take care to keep yourselves free from the desire for property ; for a man's life is not made up of the number of things which he has .
And he said to them , in a story , The land of a certain man of great wealth was very fertile :
And he said to himself , What is to be done ? for I have no place in which to put all my fruit .
And he said , This I will do : I will take down my store-houses and make greater ones , and there I will put all my grain and my goods .
And I will say to my soul , Soul , you have a great amount of goods in store , enough for a number of years ; be at rest , take food and wine and be happy .
But God said to him , You foolish one , tonight I will take your soul from you , and who then will be the owner of all the things which you have got together ?
So that is what comes to the man who gets wealth for himself , and has not wealth in the eyes of God .
And he said to his disciples , For this reason I say to you , Take no thought for your life , about what food you will take , or for your body , how it may be clothed .
Is not life more than food , and the body than its clothing ?
Give thought to the ravens ; they do not put seeds into the earth , or get together grain ; they have no store-houses or buildings ; and God gives them their food : of how much greater value are you than the birds !
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself any taller ?
If , then , you are not able to do even that which is least , why are you troubled about the rest ?
Give thought to the flowers : they do no work , they make no thread ; and still I say to you , Even Solomon , in all his glory , was not clothed like one of these .
But if God gives such clothing to the grass in the field , which today is living , and tomorrow will be burned in the oven , how much more will he give clothing to you , O men of little faith ?
And do not give overmuch thought to your food and drink , and let not your mind be full of doubts .
For the nations of the world go in search of all these things : but your Father has knowledge that you have need of them .
But let your chief care be for his kingdom , and these other things will be given to you in addition .
Have no fear , little flock , for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom .
Give what property you have in exchange for money , and give the money to the poor ; make for yourselves money-bags which will not get old , wealth stored up in heaven which will be yours for ever , where thieves will not come nor worms put it to destruction .
For where your wealth is , there will your heart be .
Be ready , dressed as for a journey , with your lights burning .
And be like men who are looking for their lord , when he comes back from the bride-feast ; so that when he comes to the door , it will be open to him quickly .
Happy are those servants who are watching when the lord comes ; truly I say to you , he will make himself their servant and , placing them at the table , he will come out and give them food .
And if he comes in the second division of the night or in the third , and they are watching for him , happy are those servants .
But be certain of this , that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming , he would have been watching , and would not have let his house be broken into .
So be ready : for the Son of man is coming at a time when you are not looking for him .
And Peter said to him , Lord , are these words said to us only , or to all men ?
And the Lord said , Who then is the wise and responsible servant whom his lord will put in control of his family , to give them their food at the right time ?
Happy is that servant who , when his lord comes , is doing so .
Truly I say to you , he will put him in control of all his goods .
But if that servant says to himself , My lord is a long time coming ; and goes about giving blows to the men-servants and the women-servants , feasting and taking overmuch wine ;
The lord of that servant will come at a time when he is not looking for him , and at an hour when he is not ready for him , and he will have him cut in two and will give him his part in the fate of those who have no faith ;
And the servant who had knowledge of his lord's desires and was not ready for him and did not do as he was ordered , will be given a great number of blows ;
But he who , without knowledge , did things for which punishment is given , will get only a small number of blows . The man to whom much is given , will have to give much ; if much is given into his care , of him more will be requested .
I came to send a fire on the earth , and it may even now have been lighted .
But there is a baptism which I have to undergo ; and how am I kept back till it is complete !
Is it your opinion that I have come to give peace on earth ? I say to you , No , but division :
For from this time , a family of five in one house will be on opposite sides , three against two and two against three .
They will be at war , the father against his son , and the son against his father ; mother against daughter , and daughter against mother ; mother-in-law against daughter-in-law , and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law .
Then he said to the people , When you see a cloud coming up in the west , straight away you say , There will be rain ; and so it is .
And when you see a south wind blowing , you say , There will be heat ; and so it is .
O false ones ! the face of the earth and the heaven is clear to you ; how is it that the signs of these times are not as clear to you ?
And why are you , in your hearts , unable to be judges of what is right ?
For if anyone has a cause at law against you , and you are going with him before the ruler , make an attempt , on the way , to come to an agreement with him , for if you do not , he may take you before the judge and the judge will give you up to the police , and they will put you in prison .
I say to you , You will not come out of it till you have made payment to the very last farthing .
Now some people who were there at that time , gave him an account of how the blood of some Galilaeans had been mixed by Pilate with their offerings .
And he , in answer , said to them , Are you of the opinion that these Galilaeans were worse than all other Galilaeans , because these things were done to them ?
I say to you , It is not so : but if your hearts are not changed , you will all come to the same end .
Or those eighteen men who were crushed by the fall of the tower of Siloam , were they worse than all the other men living in Jerusalem ?
I say to you , It is not so : but if your hearts are not changed , you will all come to an end in the same way .
And he made up this story for them : A certain man had a fig-tree in his garden , and he came to get fruit from it , and there was no fruit .
And he said to the gardener , See , for three years I have been looking for fruit from this tree , and I have not had any : let it be cut down ; why is it taking up space ?
And he said , Lord , let it be for this year , and I will have the earth turned up round it , and put animal waste on it , to make it fertile :
And if , after that , it has fruit , it is well ; if not , let it be cut down .
And he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath .
And there was a woman who had had a disease for eighteen years ; she was bent , and was not able to make herself straight .
And when Jesus saw her , he said to her , Woman , you are made free from your disease .
And he put his hands on her , and she was made straight , and gave praise to God .
And the ruler of the Synagogue was angry because Jesus had made her well on the Sabbath , and he said to the people , There are six days in which men may do work : so come on those days to be made well , and not on the Sabbath .
But the Lord gave him an answer and said , O you false men ! do you not , every one of you , on the Sabbath , let loose his ox and his ass and take it to the water ?
And is it not right for this daughter of Abraham , who has been in the power of Satan for eighteen years , to be made free on the Sabbath ?
And when he said these things , those who were against him were shamed , and all the people were full of joy because of the great things which were done by him .
Then he said , What is the kingdom of God like ? what comparison may I make of it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden , and it became a tree , and the birds of heaven made their resting-places in its branches .
And again he said , What is the kingdom of God like ?
It is like leaven , which a woman put into three measures of meal , and it was all leavened .
And he went on his way , through towns and country places , teaching and journeying to Jerusalem .
And someone said to him , Lord , will only a small number have salvation ? And he said to them ,
Do your best to go in by the narrow door , for I say to you , A number will make the attempt to go in , but will not be able to do so .
When the master of the house has got up , and the door has been shut , and you , still outside , give blows on the door , saying , Lord , let us in ; he will make answer and say , I have no knowledge of where you come from .
Then you will say , We have taken food and drink with you , and you were teaching in our streets .
But he will say , Truly , I have no knowledge of you or where you come from ; go away from me , you workers of evil .
There will be weeping and cries of sorrow when you see Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and all the prophets , in the kingdom of God , but you yourselves are shut outside .
And they will come from the east and from the west , from the north and from the south , and take their places in the kingdom of God .
And the last will be first , and the first will be last .
At that time , certain Pharisees came to him and said , Go away from this place , because Herod's purpose is to put you to death .
And he said , Go and say to that fox , I send out evil spirits and do works of mercy today and tomorrow , and on the third day my work will be complete .
But I have to go on my way today and tomorrow and the third day , for it is not right for a prophet to come to his death outside Jerusalem .
O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , putting to death the prophets , and stoning those who were sent to her ! again and again would I have taken your children to myself , as a bird takes her young ones under her wings , but you would not !
Now see , your house is waste , and I say to you , You will not see me again till you say , A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord .
And it came about that when he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on the Sabbath , to have a meal , they were watching him .
And a certain man was there who had a disease .
And Jesus , answering , said to the scribes and Pharisees , Is it right to make people well on the Sabbath or not ?
But they said nothing . And he made him well and sent him away .
And he said to them , Which of you , whose ox or ass has got into a water-hole , will not straight away get him out on the Sabbath ?
And they had no answer to that question .
And he gave teaching in the form of a story to the guests who came to the feast , when he saw how they took the best seats ; saying to them ,
When you get a request to come to a feast , do not take the best seat , for a more important man than you may be coming ,
And then the giver of the feast will come to you and say , Give your place to this man ; and you , with shame , will have to take the lowest seat .
But when you come , go and take the lowest seat , so that when the giver of the feast comes , he may say to you , Friend , come up higher ; and then you will have honour in the eyes of all the others who are there .
For every man who gives himself a high place will be put down , but he who takes a low place will be lifted up .
And he said to the master of the house , When you give a feast , do not send for your friends and your brothers and your family or your neighbours who have wealth , for they may give a feast for you , and so you will get a reward .
But when you give a feast , send for the poor and the blind and those who are broken in body :
And you will have a blessing , because they will not be able to give you any payment , and you will get your reward when the upright come back from the dead .
And , hearing these words , one of those who were at table with him said to him , Happy is the man who will be a guest in the kingdom of God .
And he said to them , A certain man gave a great feast , and sent word of it to a number of people .
And when the time had come , he sent his servants to say to them , Come , for all things are now ready .
And they all gave reasons why they were not able to come . The first said to him , I have got a new field , and it is necessary for me to go and see it : I am full of regret that I am unable to come .
And another said , I have got some cattle , and I am going to make a test of them : I am full of regret that I am unable to come .
And another said , I have been married , and so I am not able to come .
And the servant came back and gave his master an account of these things . Then the master of the house was angry and said to the servant , Go out quickly into the streets of the town and get the poor , the blind , and those who are broken in body .
And the servant said , Lord , your orders have been done , and still there is room .
And the lord said to the servant , Go out into the roads and the fields , and make them come in , so that my house may be full .
For I say to you that not one of those who were requested to come will have a taste of my feast .
Now a great number of people went with him .
And turning round , he said to them , If any man comes to me , and has not hate for his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters , and even for his life , he may not be my disciple .
Whoever does not take up his cross and come after me may not be my disciple .
For which of you , desiring to put up a tower , does not first give much thought to the price , if he will have enough to make it complete ?
For fear that if he makes a start and is not able to go on with it to the end , all who see it will be laughing at him ,
And saying , This man made a start at building and is not able to make it complete .
Or what king , going to war with another king , will not first take thought if he will be strong enough , with ten thousand men , to keep off him who comes against him with twenty thousand ?
Or while the other is still a great distance away , he sends representatives requesting conditions of peace .
And so whoever is not ready to give up all he has may not be my disciple .
For salt is good , but if the taste goes from it , of what use is it ?
It is no good for the land or for the place of waste ; no one has a use for it . He who has ears , let him give ear .
Now all the tax-farmers and sinners came near to give ear to him .
And the Pharisees and scribes were angry , saying , This man gives approval to sinners , and takes food with them .
And he made a story for them , saying ,
What man of you , having a hundred sheep , if one of them gets loose and goes away , will not let the ninety-nine be in the waste land by themselves , and go after the wandering one , till he sees where it is ?
And when he has got it again , he takes it in his arms with joy .
And when he gets back to his house , he sends for his neighbours and friends , saying to them , Be glad with me , for I have got back my sheep which had gone away .
I say to you that even so there will be more joy in heaven when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing , than for ninety-nine good men , who have no need of a change of heart .
Or what woman , having ten bits of silver , if one bit has gone from her hands , will not get a light , and go through her house , searching with care till she sees it ?
And when she has it again , she gets her friends and neighbours together , saying , Be glad with me , for I have got back the bit of silver which had gone from me .
Even so , I say to you , There is joy among the angels of God , when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing .
And he said , A certain man had two sons :
And the younger of them said to his father , Father , give me that part of your property which will be mine . And he made division of his goods between them .
And not long after , the younger son got together everything which was his and took a journey into a far-away country , and there all his money went in foolish living .
And when everything was gone , there was no food to be had in that country , and he was in need .
And he went and put himself into the hands of one of the people of that country , and he sent him into his fields to give the pigs their food .
And so great was his need that he would have been glad to take the pigs' food , and no one gave him anything .
But when he came to his senses , he said , What numbers of my father's servants have bread enough , and more , while I am near to death here through need of food !
I will get up and go to my father , and will say to him , Father , I have done wrong , against heaven and in your eyes :
I am no longer good enough to be named your son : make me like one of your servants .
And he got up and went to his father . But while he was still far away , his father saw him and was moved with pity for him and went quickly and took him in his arms and gave him a kiss .
And his son said to him , Father , I have done wrong , against heaven and in your eyes : I am no longer good enough to be named your son .
But the father said to his servants , Get out the first robe quickly , and put it on him , and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet :
And get the fat young ox and put it to death , and let us have a feast , and be glad .
For this , my son , who was dead , is living again ; he had gone away from me , and has come back . And they were full of joy .
Now the older son was in the field : and when he came near the house , the sounds of music and dancing came to his ears .
And he sent for one of the servants , questioning him about what it might be .
And he said to him , Your brother has come ; and your father has had the young ox put to death because he has come back safely .
But he was angry and would not go in ; and his father came out and made a request to him to come in .
But he made answer and said to his father , See , all these years I have been your servant , doing your orders in everything : and you never gave me even a young goat so that I might have a feast with my friends :
But when this your son came , who has been wasting your property with bad women , you put to death the fat young ox for him .
And he said to him , Son , you are with me at all times , and all I have is yours .
But it was right to be glad and to have a feast ; for this your brother , who was dead , is living again ; he had gone away and has come back .
And another time he said to the disciples , There was a certain man of great wealth who had a servant ; and it was said to him that this servant was wasting his goods .
And he sent for him and said , What is this which is said about you ? give me an account of all you have done , for you will no longer be the manager of my property .
And the servant said to himself , What am I to do now that my lord takes away my position ? I have not enough strength for working in the fields , and I would be shamed if I made requests for money from people in the streets .
I have come to a decision what to do , so that when I am put out of my position they will take me into their houses .
And sending for every one who was in debt to his lord he said to the first , What is the amount of your debt to my lord ?
And he said , A hundred measures of oil . And he said , Take your account straight away and put down fifty .
Then he said to another , What is the amount of your debt ? And he said , A hundred measures of grain . And he said to him , Take your account and put down eighty .
And his lord was pleased with the false servant , because he had been wise ; for the sons of this world are wiser in relation to their generation than the sons of light .
And I say to you , Make friends for yourselves through the wealth of this life , so that when it comes to an end , you may be taken into the eternal resting-places .
He who is true in a little , is true in much ; he who is false in small things , is false in great .
If , then , you have not been true in your use of the wealth of this life , who will give into your care the true wealth ?
And if you have not been true in your care of the property of other people , who will give you that which is yours ?
No man may be a servant to two masters : for he will have hate for the one and love for the other ; or he will keep to the one and have no respect for the other . You may not be servants of God and of wealth .
And the Pharisees , who had a great love of money , hearing these things , were making sport of him .
And he said , You take care to seem right in the eyes of men , but God sees your hearts : and those things which are important in the opinion of men , are evil in the eyes of God .
The law and the prophets were till John : but then came the preaching of the kingdom of God , and everyone makes his way into it by force .
But heaven and earth will come to an end before the smallest letter of the law may be dropped out .
Everyone who puts away his wife and takes another , is a false husband : and he who is married to a woman whose husband has put her away , is no true husband to her .
Now there was a certain man of great wealth , who was dressed in fair clothing of purple and delicate linen , and was shining and glad every day .
And a certain poor man , named Lazarus , was stretched out at his door , full of wounds ,
Desiring the broken bits of food which came from the table of the man of wealth ; and even the dogs came and put their tongues on his wounds .
And in time the poor man came to his end , and angels took him to Abraham's breast . And the man of wealth came to his end , and was put in the earth .
And in hell , being in great pain , lifting up his eyes he saw Abraham , far away , and Lazarus on his breast .
And he gave a cry and said , Father Abraham , have mercy on me and send Lazarus , so that he may put the end of his finger in water and put it on my tongue , for I am cruelly burning in this flame .
But Abraham said , Keep in mind , my son , that when you were living , you had your good things , while Lazarus had evil things : but now , he is comforted and you are in pain .
And in addition , there is a deep division fixed between us and you , so that those who might go from here to you are not able to do so , and no one may come from you to us .
And he said , Father , it is my request that you will send him to my father's house ;
For I have five brothers ; and let him give them an account of these things , so that they may not come to this place of pain .
But Abraham said , They have Moses and the prophets ; let them give ear to what they say .
And he said , No , father Abraham , but if someone went to them from the dead , their hearts would be changed .
And he said to him , If they will not give attention to Moses and the prophets , they will not be moved even if someone comes back from the dead .
And he said to his disciples , It is necessary for causes of trouble to come about , but unhappy is he by whom they come .
It would be well for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea , before he made trouble for any of these little ones .
Give attention to yourselves : if your brother does wrong , say a sharp word to him ; and if he has sorrow for his sin , let him have forgiveness .
And if he does you wrong seven times in a day , and seven times comes to you and says , I have regret for what I have done ; let him have forgiveness .
And the twelve said to the Lord , Make our faith greater .
And the Lord said , If your faith was only as great as a grain of mustard seed , you might say to this tree , Be rooted up and planted in the sea ; and it would be done .
But which of you , having a servant who is ploughing or keeping sheep , will say to him , when he comes in from the field , Come now and be seated and have a meal ,
Will he not say , Get a meal for me , and make yourself ready and see to my needs till I have had my food and drink ; and after that you may have yours ?
Does he give praise to the servant because he did what was ordered ?
In the same way , when you have done all the things which are given you to do , say , There is no profit in us , for we have only done what we were ordered to do .
And it came about that when they were on the way to Jerusalem he went through Samaria and Galilee .
And when he went into a certain small town he came across ten men who were lepers , and they , keeping themselves at a distance ,
Said , in loud voices , Jesus , Master , have mercy on us .
And when he saw them he said , Go , and let the priests see you . And , while they were going , they were made clean .
And one of them , when he saw that he was clean , turning back , gave praise to God in a loud voice ;
And , falling down on his face at the feet of Jesus , he gave the credit to him ; and he was a man of Samaria .
And Jesus said , Were there not ten men who were made clean ? where are the nine ?
Have not any of them come back to give glory to God , but only this one from a strange land ?
And he said to him , Get up , and go on your way ; your faith has made you well .
And when the Pharisees put questions to him about when the kingdom of God would come , he gave them an answer and said , The kingdom of God will not come through observation :
And men will not say , See , it is here ! or , There ! for the kingdom of God is among you .
And he said to his disciples , The time will come when you will have a great desire to see one of the days of the Son of man , but you will not see it .
And if they say to you , See , it is there ! or , It is here ! do not go away , or go after them .
For as in a thunderstorm the bright light is seen from one end of the sky to the other , so will the Son of man be when his time comes .
But first , he will have to undergo much and be put on one side by this generation .
And as it was in the days of Noah , so will it be in the day of the Son of man .
They were feasting and taking wives and getting married , till the day of the overflowing of the waters , when Noah went into the ark , and they all came to destruction .
In the same way , in the days of Lot ; they were feasting and trading , they were planting and building ;
But on the day when Lot went out of Sodom , fire came down from heaven and destruction came on them all .
So will it be in the day of the revelation of the Son of man .
On that day , if anyone is on the roof of the house , and his goods are in the house , let him not go down to take them away ; and let him who is in the field not go back to his house .
Keep in mind Lot's wife .
If anyone makes an attempt to keep his life , it will be taken from him , but if anyone gives up his life , he will keep it .
I say to you , In that night there will be two men sleeping in one bed , and one will be taken away and the other let go .
Two women will be crushing grain together ; one will be taken away and the other let go .
Two men shall be in the field ; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
And they , answering him , said , Where , Lord ? And he said to them , Where the body is , there will the eagles come together .
And he made a story for them , the point of which was that men were to go on making prayer and not get tired ;
Saying , There was a judge in a certain town , who had no fear of God or respect for man :
And there was a widow in that town , and she kept on coming to him and saying , Give me my right against the man who has done me wrong .
And for a time he would not : but later , he said to himself , Though I have no fear of God or respect for man ,
Because this widow is a trouble to me , I will give her her right ; for if not , I will be completely tired out by her frequent coming .
And the Lord said , Give ear to the words of the evil judge .
And will not God do right in the cause of his saints , whose cries come day and night to his ears , though he is long in doing it ?
I say to you that he will quickly do right in their cause . But when the Son of man comes , will there be any faith on earth ?
And he made this story for some people who were certain that they were good , and had a low opinion of others :
Two men went up to the Temple for prayer ; one a Pharisee , and the other a tax-farmer .
The Pharisee , taking up his position , said to himself these words : God , I give you praise because I am not like other men , who take more than their right , who are evil-doers , who are untrue to their wives , or even like this tax-farmer .
Twice in the week I go without food ; I give a tenth of all I have .
The tax-farmer , on the other hand , keeping far away , and not lifting up even his eyes to heaven , made signs of grief and said , God , have mercy on me , a sinner .
I say to you , This man went back to his house with God's approval , and not the other : for everyone who makes himself high will be made low and whoever makes himself low will be made high .
And they took their children to him , so that he might put his hands on them : but when the disciples saw it , they said sharp words to them
But Jesus sent for them , saying , Let the children come to me , and do not keep them away , for of such is the kingdom of heaven .
Truly I say to you , Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child , will not come into it at all .
And a certain ruler put a question to him , saying , Good Master , what have I to do so that I may have eternal life ?
And Jesus said to him , Why do you say that I am good ? No one is good , but only God .
You have knowledge of what the law says : Do not be untrue to your wife , Do not put anyone to death , Do not take what is not yours , Do not give false witness , Give honour to your father and mother .
And he said , All these things I have done from the time when I was a boy .
And Jesus , hearing it , said to him , One thing you still have need of ; get money for your goods , and give it away to the poor , and you will have wealth in heaven ; and come after me .
But at these words he became very sad , for he had great wealth .
And Jesus , looking at him , said , How hard it is for those who have wealth to get into the kingdom of God !
It is simpler for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a man who has much money to come into the kingdom of God .
And those who were present said , Then who may have salvation ?
But he said , Things which are not possible with man are possible with God .
And Peter said , See , we have given up what is ours to come after you .
And he said to them , Truly I say to you , There is no man who has given up house or wife or brothers or father or mother or children , because of the kingdom of God ,
Who will not get much more in this time , and in the world to come , eternal life .
And he took with him the twelve and said to them , Now we are going up to Jerusalem , and all the things which were said by the prophets will be done to the Son of man .
For he will be given up to the Gentiles , and will be made sport of and put to shame :
And he will be given cruel blows and put to death , and on the third day he will come back to life .
But they did not take in the sense of any of these words , and what he said was not clear to them , and their minds were not able to see it .
And it came about that when he got near Jericho , a certain blind man was seated by the side of the road , making requests for money from those who went by .
And hearing the sound of a great number of people going by , he said , What is this ?
And they said to him , Jesus of Nazareth is going by .
And he said in a loud voice , Jesus , Son of David , have mercy on me .
And those who were in front made protests and said to him , Be quiet : but he said all the more , O Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus , stopping , gave orders that he was to come to him , and when he came near , he said to him ,
What would you have me do for you ? And he said , Lord , that I may be able to see again .
And Jesus said , See again : your faith has made you well .
And straight away he was able to see , and he went after him , giving glory to God ; and all the people when they saw it gave praise to God .
And he went into Jericho , and when he was going through it ,
A man , named Zacchaeus , who was the chief tax-farmer , and a man of wealth ,
Made an attempt to get a view of Jesus , and was not able to do so , because of the people , for he was a small man .
And he went quickly in front of them and got up into a tree to see him , for he was going that way .
And when Jesus came to the place , looking up , he said to him , Zacchaeus , be quick and come down , for I am coming to your house today .
And he came down quickly , and took him into his house with joy .
And when they saw it , they were all angry , saying , He has gone into the house of a sinner .
And Zacchaeus , waiting before him , said to the Lord , See , Lord , half of my goods I give to the poor , and if I have taken anything from anyone wrongly , I give him back four times as much .
And Jesus said to him , Today salvation has come to this house , for even he is a son of Abraham .
For the Son of man came to make search for those who are wandering from the way , and to be their Saviour .
And while they were giving ear to these words , he made another story for them , because he was near Jerusalem , and because they were of the opinion that the kingdom of God was coming straight away .
So he said , A certain man of high birth went into a far-away country to get a kingdom for himself , and to come back .
And he sent for ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds and said to them , Do business with this till I come .
But his people had no love for him , and sent representatives after him , saying , We will not have this man for our ruler .
And when he came back again , having got his kingdom , he gave orders for those servants to whom he had given the money to come to him , so that he might have an account of what business they had done .
And the first came before him , saying , Lord , your pound has made ten pounds .
And he said to him , You have done well , O good servant : because you have done well in a small thing you will have authority over ten towns .
And another came , saying , Your pound has made five pounds .
And he said , You will be ruler over five towns .
And another came , saying , Lord , here is your pound , which I put away in a cloth ;
Because I was in fear of you , for you are a hard man : you take up what you have not put down , and get in grain where you have not put seed .
He said to him , By the words of your mouth you will be judged , you bad servant . You had knowledge that I am a hard man , taking up what I have not put down and getting in grain where I have not put seed ;
Why then did you not put my money in a bank , so that when I came I would get it back with interest ?
And he said to the others who were near , Take the pound away from him , and give it to the man who has ten .
And they say to him , Lord , he has ten pounds .
And I say to you that to everyone who has , more will be given , but from him who has not , even what he has will be taken away .
And as for those who were against me , who would not have me for their ruler , let them come here , and be put to death before me .
And when he had said this , he went on in front of them , going up to Jerusalem .
And it came about that when he got near Beth-phage and Bethany by the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives , he sent two of the disciples ,
Saying , Go into the little town in front of you , and on going in you will see a young ass fixed with a cord , on which no man has ever been seated ; let him loose and take him .
And if anyone says to you , Why are you taking him ? say , The Lord has need of him .
And those whom he sent went away , and it was as he said .
And when they were getting the young ass , the owners of it said to them , Why are you taking the young ass ?
And they said , The Lord has need of him .
And they took him to Jesus , and they put their clothing on the ass , and Jesus got on to him .
And while he went on his way they put their clothing down on the road in front of him .
And when he came near the foot of the Mountain of Olives , all the disciples with loud voices gave praise to God with joy , because of all the great works which they had seen ;
Saying , A blessing on the King who comes in the name of the Lord ; peace in heaven and glory in the highest .
And some of the Pharisees among the people said to him , Master , make your disciples be quiet .
And he said in answer , I say to you , if these men keep quiet , the very stones will be crying out .
And when he got near and saw the town , he was overcome with weeping for it ,
Saying , If you , even you , had knowledge today , of the things which give peace ! but you are not able to see them .
For the time will come when your attackers will put a wall round you , and come all round you and keep you in on every side ,
And will make you level with the earth , and your children with you ; and there will not be one stone resting on another in you , because you did not see that it was your day of mercy .
And he went into the Temple and put out those who were trading there ,
Saying to them , It has been said , My house is to be a house of prayer , but you have made it a hole of thieves .
And every day he was teaching in the Temple . But the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people were attempting to put him to death ;
But they were not able to do anything , because the people all kept near him , being greatly interested in his words .
And it came about on one of those days , when he was teaching the people in the Temple and preaching the good news ,
That the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people came to him and said , Make clear to us by what authority you do these things and who gave you this authority ?
And in answer he said to them , I will put a question to you , and do you give me an answer :
The baptism of John , was it from heaven or of men ?
And they said among themselves , If we say , From heaven ; he will say , Why did you not have faith in him ?
But if we say , Of men ; we will be stoned by the people , for they are certain that John was a prophet .
And they made answer that they had no idea where it came from .
And Jesus said , And I will not make clear to you by what authority I do these things .
And he gave the people this story : A man made a vine-garden and gave the use of it to some field-workers and went into another country for a long time .
And at the right time he sent a servant to the workers to get part of the fruit from the vines ; but the workmen gave him blows and sent him away with nothing .
And he sent another servant , and they gave blows to him in the same way , and put shame on him , and sent him away with nothing .
And he sent a third , and they gave him wounds and put him out .
And the lord of the garden said , What am I to do ? I will send my dearly loved son ; they may give respect to him .
But when the workmen saw him , they said to one another , This is he who will one day be the owner of the property : let us put him to death and the heritage will be ours .
And driving him out of the garden they put him to death . Now what will the lord do to these workmen ?
He will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others . And when he said this , they said , May it not be so .
But he , looking on them , said , Is it not in the Writings , The stone which the builders put on one side , the same has become the chief stone of the building ?
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken , but the man on whom the stone comes down will be crushed to dust .
And the chief priests and the scribes made attempts to get their hands on him in that very hour ; and they were in fear of the people , for they saw that he had made up this story against them .
And they kept watch on him , and sent out secret representatives , who were acting the part of good men , in order that they might get something from his words , on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler .
And they put a question to him , saying , Master , we are certain that your teaching and your words are right , and that you have no respect for a man's position , but you are teaching the true way of God :
Is it right for us to make payment of taxes to Caesar or not ?
But he saw through their trick and said to them ,
Let me see a penny . Whose image and name are on it ? And they said , Caesar's .
And he said , Then give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's , and to God the things which are God's .
And they were not able to get anything from these words before the people : but they were full of wonder at his answer , and said nothing .
And some of the Sadducees came to him , who say that there is no coming back from the dead ; and they said to him ,
Master , Moses said that if a man's brother comes to his end , having a wife , but no children , his brother is to take the wife , and get a family for his brother .
Now there were seven brothers , and the first had a wife and came to his end , having no children ;
And the second ;
And the third took her ; and in the same way , all the seven , without having any children , came to their end .
And last of all , the woman came to her end .
When they come back from the dead , whose wife will she be ? for all the seven had her .
And Jesus said to them , The sons of this world are married and have wives ;
But those to whom is given the reward of the world to come , and to come back from the dead , have no wives , and are not married ;
And death has no more power over them , for they are equal to the angels , and are sons of God , being of those who will come back from the dead .
But even Moses made it clear that the dead come back to life , saying , in the story of the burning thorn-tree , The Lord , the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob .
Now he is not the God of the dead but of the living : for all men are living to him .
And some of the scribes , in answer to this , said , Master , you have said well .
And they had fear of putting any more questions to him .
And he said to them , Why do they say that the Christ is the son of David ?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms , The Lord said to my Lord , Take your seat at my right hand ,
Till I put under your feet all those who are against you .
David then gives him the name of Lord , so how is it possible for him to be his son ?
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples ,
Keep away from the scribes , whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes , and to have words of respect said to them in the market-places , and to take the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts ;
Who take the property of widows and before the eyes of men make long prayers ; they will get a greater punishment .
And looking up , he saw the men of wealth putting their offerings in the money-box .
And he saw a certain poor widow putting in a farthing .
And he said , Truly I say to you , This poor widow has given more than all of them :
For they gave out of their wealth , having more than enough for themselves : but she , even out of her need , has put in all her living .
And some were talking about the Temple , how it was made fair with beautiful stones and with offerings , but he said ,
As for these things which you see , the days will come when not one stone will be resting on another , but all will be broken down .
And they said to him , Master , when will these things be ? and what sign will there be when these events are to take place ?
And he said , Take care that you are not tricked : for a number of people will come in my name , saying , I am he ; and , The time is near : do not go after them .
And when news of wars and troubled times comes to your ears , have no fear ; for these things have to be , but the end will not be now .
Then he said to them , Nation will be moved against nation and kingdom against kingdom :
There will be great earth-shocks and outbursts of disease in a number of places , and men will be without food ; and there will be wonders and great signs from heaven .
But before all this , they will take you and be very cruel to you , giving you up to the Synagogues and to prisons , taking you before kings and rulers , because of my name .
And it will be turned to a witness for you .
So take care not to be troubled before the time comes , about what answers you will give :
For I will give you words and wisdom , so that not one of those who are against you will be able to get the better of you , or to put you in the wrong .
But you will be given up even by your fathers and mothers , your brothers and relations and friends ; and some of you will be put to death .
And you will be hated by all men , because of me .
But not a hair of your head will come to destruction .
By going through all these things , you will keep your lives .
But when you see armies all round about Jerusalem , then be certain that her destruction is near .
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains ; and those who are in the middle of the town go out ; and let not those who are in the country come in .
For these are the days of punishment , in which all the things in the Writings will be put into effect .
It will be hard for women who are with child , and for her with a baby at the breast , in those days . For great trouble will come on the land , and wrath on this people .
And they will be put to death with the sword , and will be taken as prisoners into all the nations ; and Jerusalem will be crushed under the feet of the Gentiles , till the times of the Gentiles are complete .
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars ; and on the earth , fear among the nations and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the waves ;
Men's strength will go from them in fear and in waiting for the things which are coming on the earth ; for the powers of the heavens will be moved .
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud , with power and great glory .
But when these things come about , let your heads be lifted up , because your salvation is near .
And he made a story for them : See the fig-tree , and all the trees ;
When they put out their young leaves , you take note of it , and it is clear to you that summer is coming .
In the same way , when you see these things taking place you may be certain that the kingdom of God is near .
Truly I say to you , This generation will not come to an end till all things are complete .
Heaven and earth will come to an end , but my words will not come to an end .
But give attention to yourselves , for fear that your hearts become over-full of the pleasures of food and wine , and the cares of this life , and that day may come on you suddenly , and take you as in a net :
For so it will come on all those who are living on the face of all the earth .
But keep watch at all times with prayer , that you may be strong enough to come through all these things and take your place before the Son of man .
And every day he was teaching in the Temple and every night he went out to the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives to take his rest .
And all the people came early in the morning to give ear to his words in the Temple .
Now the feast of unleavened bread was near , which is called the Passover .
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a chance to put him to death , but they went in fear of the people .
And Satan came into Judas Iscariot , who was one of the twelve .
And he went away and had a discussion with the chief priests and the rulers , about how he might give him up to them .
And they were glad , and undertook to give him money .
And he made an agreement with them to give him up to them , if he got a chance , when the people were not present .
And the day of unleavened bread came , when the Passover lamb is put to death .
And Jesus sent Peter and John , saying , Go and make the Passover ready for us , so that we may take it .
And they said to him , Where are we to get it ready ?
And he said to them , When you go into the town you will see a man coming to you with a vessel of water ; go after him into the house into which he goes .
And say to the master of the house , The Master says , Where is the guest-room , where I may take the Passover with my disciples ?
And he will take you up to a great room with a table and seats : there make ready .
And they went , and it was as he had said : and they made the Passover ready .
And when the time had come , he took his seat , and the Apostles with him .
And he said , I have had a great desire to keep this Passover with you before I come to my death ;
For I say to you , I will not take it till it is made complete in the kingdom of God .
And he took a cup and , having given praise , he said , Make division of this among yourselves ;
For I say to you , I will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of God has come .
And he took bread and , having given praise , he gave it to them when it had been broken , saying , This is my body , which is given for you : do this in memory of me .
And in the same way , after the meal , he took the cup , saying , This cup is the new testament , made with my blood which is given for you .
But the hand of him who is false to me is with me at the table .
For it will be done to the Son of man after the purpose of God , but unhappy is that man by whom he is given up !
And they were wondering among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing .
And there was an argument among them about which of them was the greatest .
And he said , The kings of the Gentiles are lords over them , and those who have authority are given names of honour .
But let it not be so with you ; but he who is greater , let him become like the younger ; and he who is chief , like a servant .
For which is greater , the guest who is seated at a meal or the servant who is waiting on him ? is it not the guest ? but I am among you as a servant .
But you are those who have kept with me through my troubles ;
And I will give you a kingdom as my Father has given one to me ,
So that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom , and be seated like kings , judging the twelve tribes of Israel .
Simon , Simon , Satan has made a request to have you , so that he may put you to the test as grain is tested :
But I have made prayer for you , that your faith may not go from you : and when you are turned again , make your brothers strong .
And he said to him , Lord , I am ready to go with you to prison and to death .
And he said , I say to you , Peter , before the cock's second cry today , you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me .
And he said to them , When I sent you out without money or bag or shoes , were you in need of anything ? And they said , Nothing .
And he said to them , But now , he who has a money-bag , or a bag for food , let him take it : and he who has not , let him give his coat for money and get a sword .
For I say to you that these words will be put into effect in me , And he was numbered among the evil-doers : for what has been said in the Writings about me has an end .
And they said , Lord , here are two swords . And he said , It is enough .
And he came out , and went , as his way was , to the Mountain of Olives , and the disciples went with him .
And when he came to the place , he said to them , Make a prayer that you may not be put to the test .
And he went a little distance away from them and , falling on his knees in prayer , he said ,
Father , if it is your pleasure , take this cup from me : but still , let your pleasure , not mine , be done .
And an angel from heaven came to him , to give him strength .
And being in great trouble of soul , the force of his prayer became stronger , and great drops , like blood , came from him , falling to the earth .
And , getting up from prayer , he came to the disciples , and saw that they were sleeping for sorrow .
And he said , Why are you sleeping ? Get up , and give yourselves to prayer , so that you may not be put to the test .
And while he was saying these words , there came a band of people , and Judas , one of the twelve , was in front of them , and he came near to Jesus to give him a kiss .
But Jesus said to him , Judas , will you be false to the Son of man with a kiss ?
And when those who were with him saw what was coming , they said , Lord , may we not make use of our swords ?
And one of them gave a blow to the servant of the high priest , cutting off his right ear .
But Jesus , answering , said , Put up with this , at least . And touching his ear , he made it well .
And Jesus said to the chief priests and the captains of the Temple and the rulers , who had come against him , Have you come out as against a thief , with swords and sticks ?
When I was in the Temple with you every day , your hands were not stretched out against me : but this is your hour , and the authority of the dark power .
And they made him a prisoner and took him away to the house of the high priest . But Peter went after them at a distance .
And a fire was lighted in the middle of the open square , and they were seated together , and Peter was among them .
And a certain woman-servant , seeing him in the light of the fire , and looking at him with attention , said , This man was with him .
But he said , Woman , it is not true ; I have no knowledge of him .
And after a little time , another saw him and said , You are one of them ; and he said , Man , I am not .
And after about an hour , another man said , with decision , Certainly this man was with him , for he is a Galilaean .
From the first he was the Word , and the Word was in relation with God and was God .
This Word was from the first in relation with God .
All things came into existence through him , and without him nothing was .
What came into existence in him was life , and the life was the light of men .
And the light goes on shining in the dark ; it is not overcome by the dark .
There was a man sent from God , whose name was John .
He came for witness , to give witness about the light , so that all men might have faith through him .
He himself was not the light : he was sent to give witness about the light .
The true light , which gives light to every man , was then coming into the world .
He was in the world , the world which came into being through him , but the world had no knowledge of him .
He came to the things which were his and his people did not take him to their hearts .
To all those who did so take him , however , he gave the right of becoming children of God--that is , to those who had faith in his name :
Whose birth was from God and not from blood , or from an impulse of the flesh and man's desire .
And so the Word became flesh and took a place among us for a time ; and we saw his glory--such glory as is given to an only son by his father--saw it to be true and full of grace .
John gave witness about him , crying , This is he of whom I said , He who is coming after me is put over me because he was in existence before me .
From his full measure we have all been given grace on grace .
For the law was given through Moses ; grace and the true way of life are ours through Jesus Christ .
No man has seen God at any time ; the only Son , who is on the breast of the Father , he has made clear what God is .
And this is the witness of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him with the question , Who are you ?
He said quite openly and straightforwardly , I am not the Christ .
And they said to him , What then ? Are you Elijah ? And he said , I am not . Are you the prophet ? And his answer was , I am not .
So they said to him , Who are you then ? We have to give some answer to those who sent us . What have you to say about yourself ?
He said , I am the voice of one crying in the waste land , Make straight the way of the Lord , as said Isaiah the prophet .
Those who had been sent came from the Pharisees .
And they put this question to him , saying , Why then are you giving baptism if you are not the Christ , or Elijah , or the prophet ?
John's answer was : I give baptism with water ; but there is one among you of whom you have no knowledge ;
It is he who is coming after me ; I am not good enough to undo his shoes .
These things took place at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan , where John was giving baptism .
The day after , John sees Jesus coming to him and says , See , here is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world !
This is he of whom I said , One is coming after me who is put over me because he was in existence before me .
I myself had no knowledge of him , but I came giving baptism with water so that he might be seen openly by Israel .
And John gave this witness , saying , I saw the Spirit coming down from heaven like a dove and resting on him .
I had no knowledge who he was , but he who sent me to give baptism with water said to me , The one on whom you see the Spirit coming down and resting , it is he who gives baptism with the Holy Spirit .
This I saw myself and my witness is that he is the Son of God .
The day after , John was there again with two of his disciples ;
And looking at Jesus while he was walking he said , See , there is the Lamb of God !
Hearing what he said , the two disciples went after Jesus .
And Jesus , turning round , saw them coming after him and said to them , What are you looking for ? They said to him , Rabbi (which is to say , Master) , where are you living ?
He said to them , Come and see . They went with him then and saw where he was living ; and they were with him all that day : it was then about the tenth hour of the day .
Andrew , Simon Peter's brother , was one of the two men who , hearing what John said , went after Jesus .
Early in the morning he came across his brother and said to him , We have made discovery , It is the Messiah ! (which is to say , the Christ) .
And he took him to Jesus . Looking at him fixedly Jesus said , You are Simon , the son of John ; your name will be Cephas (which is to say , Peter) .
The day after this , Jesus had a desire to go into Galilee . He came across Philip and said to him , Come and be my disciple .
Now Philip's town was Beth-saida , where Andrew and Peter came from .
Philip came across Nathanael and said to him , We have made a discovery ! It is he of whom Moses , in the law , and the prophets were writing , Jesus of Nazareth , the son of Joseph .
And Nathanael asked , Is it possible for any good to come out of Nazareth ? Philip said to him , Come and see .
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and said of him , See , here is a true son of Israel in whom there is nothing false !
Nathanael said to him , Where did you get knowledge of me ? In answer Jesus said , Before Philip was talking with you , while you were still under the fig-tree , I saw you .
Nathanael said to him , Rabbi , you are the Son of God , you are King of Israel !
In answer Jesus said to him , You have faith because I said to you , I saw you under the fig-tree . You will see greater things than these .
And he said to him , Truly I say to you all , You will see heaven opening and God's angels going up and coming down on the Son of man .
On the third day two people were going to be married at Cana in Galilee . The mother of Jesus was there :
And Jesus with his disciples came as guests .
When they had not enough wine , the mother of Jesus said to him , They have no wine .
Jesus said to her , Woman , this is not your business ; my time is still to come .
His mother said to the servants , Whatever he says to you , do it .
Now six pots of stone , every one taking two or three firkins of water , were placed there for the purpose of washing , as is the way of the Jews .
Jesus said to the servants , Make the pots full of water . And they made them full to the top .
Then he said to them , Now take some , and give it to the master of the feast . So they took it to him .
After tasting the water which had now become wine , the master of the feast (having no idea where it came from , though it was clear to the servants who took the water out) sent for the newly-married man ,
And said to him , Every man first puts out his best wine and when all have had enough he puts out what is not so good ; but you have kept the good wine till now .
This , the first of his signs , Jesus did at Cana in Galilee and let his glory be seen openly ; and his disciples put their faith in him .
After this he went down to Capernaum , with his mother , his brothers , and his disciples , and they were there not more than two or three days .
The time of the Passover of the Jews was near and Jesus went up to Jerusalem .
And there in the Temple he saw men trading in oxen and sheep and doves , and he saw the changers of money in their seats :
And he made a whip of small cords and put them all out of the Temple , with the sheep and the oxen , sending in all directions the small money of the changers and overturning their tables ;
And to those who were trading in doves he said , Take these things away ; do not make my Father's house a market .
And it came to the minds of the disciples that the Writings say , I am on fire with passion for your house .
Then the Jews put this question to him : What sign of authority have you to give us , seeing that you do these things ?
And Jesus said to them , Send destruction on this Temple and I will put it up again in three days .
The Jews said , The building of this Temple took forty-six years ; and you will put it up in three days !
But his words were about that holy building which was his body .
So when he had come back again from the dead , the memory of these words came back to the disciples , and they had faith in the holy Writings and in the word which Jesus had said .
Now while he was in Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover , a great number of people came to have faith in his name , after seeing the signs which he did .
But Jesus did not have faith in them , because he had knowledge of them all .
He had no need for any witness about man ; for he himself had knowledge of what was in man .
Now there was among the Pharisees a man named Nicodemus , who was one of the rulers of the Jews .
He came to Jesus by night and said to him , Rabbi , we are certain that you have come from God as a teacher , because no man would be able to do these signs which you do if God was not with him .
Jesus said to him , Truly , I say to you , Without a new birth no man is able to see the kingdom of God .
Nicodemus said to him , How is it possible for a man to be given birth when he is old ? Is he able to go into his mother's body a second time and come to birth again ?
Jesus said in answer , Truly , I say to you , If a man's birth is not from water and from the Spirit , it is not possible for him to go into the kingdom of God .
That which has birth from the flesh is flesh , and that which has birth from the Spirit is spirit .
Do not be surprised that I say to you , It is necessary for you to have a second birth .
The wind goes where its pleasure takes it , and the sound of it comes to your ears , but you are unable to say where it comes from and where it goes : so it is with everyone whose birth is from the Spirit .
And Nicodemus said to him , How is it possible for these things to be ?
And Jesus , answering , said , Are you the teacher of Israel and have no knowledge of these things ?
Truly , I say to you , We say that of which we have knowledge ; we give witness of what we have seen ; and you do not take our witness to be true .
If you have no belief when my words are about the things of earth , how will you have belief if my words are about the things of heaven ?
And no one has ever gone up to heaven but he who came down from heaven , the Son of man .
As the snake was lifted up by Moses in the waste land , even so it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up :
So that whoever has faith may have in him eternal life .
For God had such love for the world that he gave his only Son , so that whoever has faith in him may not come to destruction but have eternal life .
God did not send his Son into the world to be judge of the world ; he sent him so that the world might have salvation through him .
The man who has faith in him does not come up to be judged ; but he who has no faith in him has been judged even now , because he has no faith in the name of the only Son of God .
And this is the test by which men are judged : the light has come into the world and men have more love for the dark than for the light , because their acts are evil .
The light is hated by everyone whose acts are evil and he does not come to the light for fear that his acts will be seen .
But he whose life is true comes to the light , so that it may be clearly seen that his acts have been done by the help of God .
After these things Jesus and his disciples went into the land of Judaea , and there he was with them for some time , giving baptism .
Now John was then giving baptism at Aenon near Salim , because there was much water there ; and people came and were given baptism .
For at this time John had not been put into prison .
Then a question came up between John's disciples and a Jew about washing .
And they went to John and said to him , Rabbi , the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan , the man to whom you gave witness , is now giving baptism , and everyone is going to him .
And this was John's answer : A man is unable to have anything if it is not given to him from heaven .
You yourselves give witness that I said , I am not the Christ . What I said was , I am sent before the Christ .
He who has the bride is the husband : but the husband's friend , whose place is by his side and whose ears are open to him , is full of joy because of the husband's voice : such is my joy , and it is complete .
He has to become greater while I become less .
He who comes from heaven is greater than all others : he who comes from earth is of the earth , and of the earth are his words : he who comes from heaven is over all .
He gives witness of what he has seen and of what has come to his ears ; and no man takes his witness as true .
He who so takes his witness has made clear his faith that God is true .
For he whom God has sent says God's words ; and God does not give him the Spirit by measure .
The Father has love for the Son and has put all things into his hands .
He who has faith in the Son has eternal life ; but he who has not faith in the Son will not see life ; God's wrath is resting on him .
Now when it was clear to the Lord that word had come to the ears of the Pharisees that Jesus was making more disciples than John and was giving them baptism
(Though , in fact , it was his disciples who gave baptism , not Jesus himself) ,
He went out of Judaea into Galilee again .
And it was necessary for him to go through Samaria .
So he came to a town of Samaria which was named Sychar , near to the bit of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph :
Now Jacob's fountain was there . Jesus , being tired after his journey , was resting by the fountain . It was about the sixth hour .
A woman of Samaria came to get water , and Jesus said to her , Give me some water .
For his disciples had gone to the town to get food .
The woman of Samaria said to him , Why do you , a Jew , make a request for water to me , a woman of Samaria ? She said this because Jews have nothing to do with the people of Samaria .
In answer Jesus said , If you had knowledge of what God gives freely and who it is who says to you , Give me water , you would make your prayer to him , and he would give you living water .
The woman said to him , Sir , you have no vessel and the fountain is deep ; from where will you get the living water ?
Are you greater than our father Jacob who gave us the fountain and took the water of it himself , with his children and his cattle ?
Jesus said to her , Everyone who takes this water will be in need of it again :
But whoever takes the water I give him will never be in need of drink again ; for the water I give him will become in him a fountain of eternal life .
The woman said to him , Sir , give me this water , so that I may not be in need again of drink and will not have to come all this way for it .
Jesus said to her , Go , get your husband and come back here with him .
In answer , the woman said , I have no husband . Jesus said to her , You have said rightly , I have no husband :
You have had five husbands , and the man you have now is not your husband : that was truly said .
The woman said to him , Sir , I see that you are a prophet .
Our fathers gave worship on this mountain , but you Jews say that the right place for worship is in Jerusalem .
Jesus said to her , Woman , take my word for this ; the time is coming when you will not give worship to the Father on this mountain or in Jerusalem .
You give worship , but without knowledge of what you are worshipping : we give worship to what we have knowledge of : for salvation comes from the Jews .
But the time is coming , and is even now here , when the true worshippers will give worship to the Father in the true way of the spirit , for these are the worshippers desired by the Father .
God is Spirit : then let his worshippers give him worship in the true way of the spirit .
The woman said to him , I am certain that the Messiah , who is named Christ , is coming ; when he comes he will make all things clear to us .
Jesus said to her , I , who am talking to you , am he .
At that point the disciples came back , and they were surprised to see him talking to a woman ; but not one of them said to him , What is your purpose ? or , Why are you talking to her ?
Then the woman put down her water-pot and went into the town , and said to the people ,
Come and see a man who has been talking to me of everything I ever did ! Is it possible that this is the Christ ?
So they went out of the town and came to him .
While this was taking place , the disciples were saying to Jesus , Master , take some food .
But he said to them , I have food of which you have no knowledge .
So the disciples said one to another , Did anyone give him food ?
Jesus said , My food is to do the pleasure of him who sent me and to make his work complete .
You would say , Four months from now is the time of the grain-cutting . Take a look , I say to you , at the fields ; they are even now white for cutting .
He who does the cutting now has his reward ; he is getting together fruit for eternal life , so that he who did the planting and he who gets in the grain may have joy together .
In this the saying is a true one , One does the planting , and another gets in the grain .
I sent you to get in grain which you had no hand in planting : other men did that work , and you take the reward .
Now a number of the people of that town had faith in him because of the woman's witness : He has been talking to me of everything I ever did .
So when the people came to him they made request to him to be among them for a time , and he was there two days .
And a great number more of them came to have faith in him because of what he himself said .
And they said to the woman , Now we have faith , but not because of your story : we ourselves have given ear to his words , and we are certain that he is truly the Saviour of the world .
And after the two days he went on from there into Galilee .
For Jesus himself said that a prophet has no honour in the country of his birth .
So when he came into Galilee , the Galilaeans took him to their hearts because of the things which they had seen him do in Jerusalem at the feast--they themselves having been there at the feast .
So he came to Cana in Galilee , where he had made the water wine . And there was a certain man of high position whose son was ill at Capernaum .
When it came to his ears that Jesus had come from Judaea into Galilee , he went to him and made a request that he would come down to his son , who was near to death , and make him well .
Then Jesus said to him , You will not have faith if you do not see signs and wonders .
The man said , Sir , come down before my boy is dead .
And Jesus said , Go in peace ; your son is living . The man had faith in the word which Jesus said to him and went away .
And while he was going down , his servants came to him and said , Your boy is living .
So he put a question to them as to the hour when he became better ; and they said to him , The disease went from him yesterday at the seventh hour .
It was clear then to the father that this was the very time at which Jesus said to him , Your son is living . And he had faith in Jesus , he and all his family .
Now this is the second sign which Jesus did after he had come out of Judaea into Galilee .
After these things there was a feast of the Jews , and Jesus went up to Jerusalem .
Now in Jerusalem near the sheep-market there is a public bath which in Hebrew is named Beth-zatha . It has five doorways .
In these doorways there were a great number of people with different diseases : some unable to see , some without the power of walking , some with wasted bodies .
One man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years .
When Jesus saw him there on the floor it was clear to him that he had been now a long time in that condition , and so he said to the man , Is it your desire to get well ?
The ill man said in answer , Sir , I have nobody to put me into the bath when the water is moving ; and while I am on the way down some other person gets in before me .
Jesus said to him , Get up , take your bed and go .
And the man became well straight away , and took up his bed and went . Now that day was the Sabbath .
So the Jews said to the man who had been made well , It is the Sabbath ; and it is against the law for you to take up your bed .
He said to them , But he who made me well , said to me , Take up your bed and go .
Then they put to him the question : Who is the man who said to you , Take it up and go ?
Now he who had been made well had no knowledge who it was , Jesus having gone away because of the number of people who were in that place .
After a time Jesus came across him in the Temple and said to him , See , you are well and strong ; do no more sin for fear a worse thing comes to you .
The man went away and said to the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well .
And for this reason the Jews were turned against Jesus , because he was doing these things on the Sabbath .
But his answer was : My Father is still working even now , and so I am working .
For this cause the Jews had an even greater desire to put Jesus to death , because not only did he not keep the Sabbath but he said God was his Father , so making himself equal with God .
So Jesus made answer and said , Truly I say to you , The Son is not able to do anything himself ; he is able to do only what he sees the Father doing ; whatever the Father does the Son does it in the same way .
For the Father has love for the Son and lets him see everything which he does : and he will let him see greater works than these so that you may be full of wonder .
In the same way , as the Father gives life to the dead , even so the Son gives life to those to whom he is pleased to give it .
The Father is not the judge of men , but he has given all decisions into the hands of the Son ;
So that all men may give honour to the Son even as they give honour to the Father . He who gives no honour to the Son gives no honour to the Father who sent him .
Truly I say to you , The man whose ears are open to my word and who has faith in him who sent me , has eternal life ; he will not be judged , but has come from death into life .
Truly I say to you , The time is coming , it has even now come , when the voice of the Son of God will come to the ears of the dead , and those hearing it will have life .
For even as the Father has life in himself , so he has given to the Son to have life in himself .
And he has given him authority to be judge because he is the Son of man .
Do not be surprised at this : for the time is coming when his voice will come to all who are in the place of the dead ,
And they will come out ; those who have done good , into the new life ; and those who have done evil , to be judged .
Of myself I am unable to do anything : as the voice comes to me so I give a decision : and my decision is right because I have no desire to do what is pleasing to myself , but only what is pleasing to him who sent me .
If I gave witness about myself , my witness would not be true .
There is another who gives witness about me and I am certain that the witness he gives about me is true .
You sent to John and he gave true witness .
But I have no need of a man's witness : I only say these things so that you may have salvation .
He was a burning and shining light , and for a time you were ready to be happy in his light .
But the witness which I have is greater than that of John : the work which the Father has given me to do , the very work which I am now doing , is a witness that the Father has sent me .
And the Father himself who sent me has given witness about me . Not one of you has ever given ear to his voice ; his form you have not seen .
And you have not kept his word in your hearts , because you have not faith in him whom he has sent .
You make search in the holy Writings , in the belief that through them you get eternal life ; and it is those Writings which give witness about me .
And still you have no desire to come to me so that you may have life .
I do not take honour from men ;
But I have knowledge of you that you have no love for God in your hearts .
I have come in my Father's name , and your hearts are not open to me . If another comes with no other authority but himself , you will give him your approval .
How is it possible for you to have faith while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour which comes from the only God ?
Put out of your minds the thought that I will say things against you to the Father : the one who says things against you is Moses , on whom you put your hopes .
If you had belief in Moses you would have belief in me ; for his writings are about me .
If you have no belief in his writings , how will you have belief in my words ?
After these things Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee--that is , the sea of Tiberias .
And a great number of people went after him because they saw the signs which he did on those who were ill .
Then Jesus went up the mountain and was seated there with his disciples .
Now the Passover , a feast of the Jews , was near .
Lifting up his eyes , Jesus saw a great number of people coming to where he was , and he said to Philip , Where may we get bread for all these people ?
This he said , testing him : for he had no doubt what he himself would do .
Philip made answer , Bread to the value of two hundred pence would not be enough even to give everyone a little .
One of his disciples , Andrew , the brother of Simon Peter , said to Jesus ,
There is a boy here with five barley cakes and two fishes : but what is that among such a number ?
Jesus said , Let the people be seated . Now there was much grass in that place . And those seated on the grass were about five thousand .
Then Jesus took the cakes and having given praise to God , he gave them to the people who were seated , and the fishes in the same way , as much as they had need of .
And when they had had enough , Jesus said to his disciples , Take up the broken bits which are over , so that nothing may be wasted .
So they took them up : twelve baskets full of broken bits of the five cakes which were over after the people had had enough .
And when the people saw the sign which he had done , they said , Truly , this is the prophet who is to come into the world .
Now when Jesus saw that the people were about to come and take him by force to make him a king , he went away again up the mountain by himself .
When evening came the disciples went down to the sea ;
And they took a boat and went across the sea in the direction of Capernaum . By then it was dark and still Jesus had not come to them .
The sea was getting rough because of a strong wind which was blowing .
After they had gone three or four miles they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near to the boat ; and they had great fear .
But he said to them , It is I , have no fear .
Then they readily took him into the boat : and straight away the boat was at the land to which they were going .
The day after , the people who were on the other side of the sea saw that only one small boat had been there , that Jesus had not gone in that boat with the disciples , but that the disciples had gone away by themselves .
Some other boats , however , came from Tiberias near to the place where they had taken the bread after the Lord had given praise .
So when the people saw that Jesus was not there , or his disciples , they got into those boats and went over to Capernaum looking for Jesus .
And when they came across him on the other side of the sea they said , Rabbi , when did you come here ?
Jesus , answering them , said , Truly I say to you , You come after me , not because you saw signs , but because you were given the bread and had enough .
Let your work not be for the food which comes to an end , but for the food which goes on for eternal life , which the Son of man will give to you , for on him has God the Father put his mark .
Then they said to him , How may we do the works of God ?
Jesus , answering , said to them , This is to do the work of God : to have faith in him whom God has sent .
So they said , What sign do you give us , so that we may see and have faith in you ? What do you do ?
Our fathers had the manna in the waste land , as the Writings say , He gave them bread from heaven .
Jesus then said to them , Truly I say to you , What Moses gave you was not the bread from heaven ; it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven .
The bread of God is the bread which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world .
Ah , Lord , they said , give us that bread for ever !
And this was the answer of Jesus : I am the bread of life . He who comes to me will never be in need of food , and he who has faith in me will never be in need of drink .
But it is as I said to you : you have seen me , and still you have no faith .
Whatever the Father gives to me will come to me ; and I will not send away anyone who comes to me .
For I have come down from heaven , not to do my pleasure , but the pleasure of him who sent me .
And this is the pleasure of him who sent me , that I am not to let out of my hands anything which he has given me , but I am to give it new life on the last day .
This , I say , is my Father's pleasure , that everyone who sees the Son and has faith in him may have eternal life : and I will take him up on the last day .
Now the Jews said bitter things about Jesus because of his words , I am the bread which came down from heaven .
And they said , Is not this Jesus , the son of Joseph , whose father and mother we have seen ? How is it then that he now says , I have come down from heaven ?
Jesus made answer and said , Do not say things against me , one to another .
No man is able to come to me if the Father who sent me does not give him the desire to come : and I will take him up from the dead on the last day .
The writings of the prophets say , And they will all have teaching from God . Everyone whose ears have been open to the teaching of the Father comes to me .
Not that anyone has ever seen the Father ; only he who is from God , he has seen the Father .
Truly I say to you , He who has faith in me has eternal life .
I am the bread of life .
Your fathers took the manna in the waste land--and they are dead .
The bread which comes from heaven is such bread that a man may take it for food and never see death .
I am the living bread which has come from heaven : if any man takes this bread for food he will have life for ever : and more than this , the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world .
Then the Jews had an angry discussion among themselves , saying , How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh for food ?
Then Jesus said to them , Truly I say to you , If you do not take the flesh of the Son of man for food , and if you do not take his blood for drink , you have no life in you .
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink has eternal life : and I will take him up from the dead at the last day .
My flesh is true food and my blood is true drink .
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink is in me and I in him .
As the living Father has sent me , and I have life because of the Father , even so he who takes me for his food will have life because of me .
This is the bread which has come down from heaven . It is not like the food which your fathers had : they took of the manna , and are dead ; but he who takes this bread for food will have life for ever .
Jesus said these things in the Synagogue while he was teaching at Capernaum .
Then , hearing this , a number of his disciples said , This is a hard saying ; who is able to take in such teaching ?
When Jesus became conscious that his disciples were protesting about what he said , he said to them , Does this give you trouble ?
What then will you say if you see the Son of man going up to where he was before ?
The spirit is the life giver ; the flesh is of no value : the words which I have said to you are spirit and they are life .
But still some of you have no faith . For it was clear to Jesus from the first who they were who had no faith , and who it was who would be false to him .
And he said , This is why I said to you , No man is able to come to me if he is not given the power to do so by the Father .
Because of what he said , a number of the disciples went back and would no longer go with him .
So Jesus said to the twelve , Have you a desire to go away ?
Then Simon Peter gave this answer : Lord , to whom are we to go ? you have the words of eternal life ;
And we have faith and are certain that you are the Holy One of God .
Then Jesus said , Did I not make a selection of you , the twelve , and one of you is a son of the Evil One ?
He was talking of Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot . It was he who was to be false to Jesus--one of the twelve .
After this , Jesus went from place to place in Galilee . He did not go about in Judaea , because the Jews were looking for a chance to put him to death .
But the feast of the Jews , the feast of tents , was near .
So his brothers said to him , Go away from here into Judaea so that your disciples may see the works which you do .
Because no man does things secretly if he has a desire that men may have knowledge of him . If you do these things , let yourself be seen by all men .
For even his brothers had no belief in him .
Jesus said to them , My time is still to come , but any time is good for you .
It is not possible for you to be hated by the world ; but I am hated by it , because I give witness that what it does is evil .
Go you up to the feast : I am not going up now to the feast because my time has not fully come .
Having said these things to them , he still kept in Galilee .
But after his brothers had gone up to the feast , then he went up , not publicly , but in secret .
At the feast the Jews were looking for him and saying , Where is he ?
And there was much discussion about him among the mass of the people . Some said , He is a good man ; but others said , No , he is giving people false ideas .
But no man said anything about him openly for fear of the Jews .
Now in the middle of the feast Jesus went up to the Temple and was teaching .
Then the Jews were surprised and said , How has this man got knowledge of books ? He has never been to school .
Jesus gave them this answer : It is not my teaching , but his who sent me .
If any man is ready to do God's pleasure he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it comes from--from God or from myself .
The man whose words come from himself is looking for glory for himself , but he who is looking for the glory of him who sent him--that man is true and there is no evil in him .
Did not Moses give you the law ? Even so , not one of you keeps the law . Why have you a desire to put me to death ?
The people said in answer , You have an evil spirit : who has any desire to put you to death ?
This was the answer of Jesus : I have done one work and you are all surprised at it .
Moses gave you circumcision--not that it comes from Moses , but from the fathers--and even on the Sabbath you give a child circumcision .
If a child is given circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken , why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath ?
Let not your decisions be based on what you see , but on righteousness .
Then some of the people of Jerusalem said , Is not this the man whose death is desired ?
And here he is talking openly and they say nothing to him ! Is it possible that the rulers have knowledge that this is truly the Christ ?
However , it is clear to us where this man comes from : but when the Christ comes no one will have knowledge where he comes from .
Then , when he was teaching in the Temple , Jesus said with a loud voice , You have knowledge of me and you have knowledge of where I come from ; and I have not come of myself ; but there is One who has sent me ; he is true , but you have no knowledge of him .
I have knowledge of him because I came from him and he sent me .
Then they had a desire to take him : but no man put hands on him because his hour was still to come .
And numbers of the people had belief in him , and they said , When the Christ comes will he do more signs than this man has done ?
This discussion of the people came to the ears of the Pharisees ; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent servants to take him .
Then Jesus said , I will be with you a little longer and then I go to him who sent me .
You will be looking for me , and you will not see me : and where I am you may not come .
So the Jews said among themselves , To what place is he going where we will not see him ? will he go to the Jews living among the Greeks and become the teacher of the Greeks ?
What is this saying of his , You will be looking for me and will not see me , and where I am you may not come ?
On the last day , the great day of the feast , Jesus got up and said in a loud voice , If any man is in need of drink let him come to me and I will give it to him .
He who has faith in me , out of his body , as the Writings have said , will come rivers of living water .
This he said of the Spirit which would be given to those who had faith in him : the Spirit had not been given then , because the glory of Jesus was still to come .
When these words came to their ears , some of the people said , This is certainly the prophet .
Others said , This is the Christ . But others said , Not so ; will the Christ come from Galilee ?
Do not the Writings say that the Christ comes of the seed of David and from Beth-lehem , the little town where David was ?
So there was a division among the people because of him .
And some of them had a desire to take him ; but no man put hands on him .
Then the servants went back to the chief priests and Pharisees , who said to them , Why have you not got him with you ?
The servants made answer , No man ever said things like this man .
Then the Pharisees said to them , Have you , like the others , been given false ideas ?
Have any of the rulers belief in him , or any one of the Pharisees ?
But these people who have no knowledge of the law are cursed .
Nicodemus--he who had come to Jesus before , being himself one of them--said to them ,
Is a man judged by our law before it has given him a hearing and has knowledge of what he has done ?
This was their answer : And do you come from Galilee ? Make search and you will see that no prophet comes out of Galilee .
And every man went to his house ;
But Jesus went to the Mountain of Olives .
And early in the morning he came again into the Temple and all the people came to him and he was seated teaching them .
Now the scribes and Pharisees came , with a woman who had been taken in the act of sinning against the married relation ;
And putting her forward , they said to him , Master , this woman has been taken in the very act of sinning against the married relation .
Now in the law Moses gave directions that such women were to be stoned ; what do you say about it ?
They said this , testing him , so that they might have something against him . But Jesus , with his head bent down , made letters on the floor with his finger .
But when they went on with their questions , he got up and said to them , Let him among you who is without sin be the first to send a stone at her .
And again , with bent head , he made letters on the floor .
And when his words came to their ears , they went out one by one , starting with the oldest even to the last , because they were conscious of what was in their hearts : and Jesus was there by himself with the woman before him .
Then Jesus got up , and seeing nobody but the woman , he said to her , Where are the men who said things against you ? did no one give a decision against you ?
And she said , No man , Lord . And Jesus said , And I do not give a decision against you : go , and never do wrong again .
Then again Jesus said to them , I am the light of the world ; he who comes with me will not be walking in the dark but will have the light of life .
So the Pharisees said to him , The witness you give is about yourself : your witness is not true .
Jesus said in answer , Even if I give witness about myself , my witness is true , because I have knowledge of where I came from and where I am going ; but you have no knowledge of where I come from or of where I am going .
You are judging from what you see ; I am judging no man .
Even if I am judging , my decision is right , because I am not by myself--with me is the Father who sent me .
Even in your law it is said that the witness of two men is true .
I give witness about myself and the Father who sent me gives witness about me .
Then they said to him , Where is your Father ? Jesus said in answer , You have no knowledge of me or of my Father : if you had knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my Father .
Jesus said these words in the place where the offerings were stored , while he was teaching in the Temple : but no man took him because his time was still to come .
Then he said to them again , I am going away and you will be looking for me , but death will overtake you in your sins . It is not possible for you to come where I am going .
So the Jews said , Will he take his life ? Is that why he says , Where I go it is not possible for you to come ?
And he said to them , You are of the earth ; I am from heaven : you are of this world ; I am not of this world .
For this reason I said to you that death will overtake you in your sins : for if you have not faith that I am he , death will come to you while you are in your sins .
Then they said to him , Who are you ? Jesus said , What I said to you from the first .
I have much to say about you and against you : but he who sent me is true and what he has said to me I say to the world .
They did not see that his words were about the Father .
So Jesus said , When the Son of man has been lifted up by you , then it will be clear to you who I am , and that I do nothing of myself , but say as the Father gave me teaching .
He who sent me is with me ; he has not gone from me , because at all times I do the things which are pleasing to him .
When he said this a number came to have faith in him .
Then Jesus said to the Jews who had faith in him , If you keep my word , then you are truly my disciples ;
And you will have knowledge of what is true , and that will make you free .
They said to him in answer , We are Abraham's seed and have never been any man's servant : why do you say , You will become free ?
And this was the answer Jesus gave them : Truly I say to you , Everyone who does evil is the servant of sin .
Now the servant does not go on living in the house for ever , but the son does .
If then the son makes you free , you will be truly free .
I am conscious that you are Abraham's seed ; but you have a desire to put me to death because my word has no place in you .
I say the things which I have seen in my Father's house : and you do the things which come to you from your father's house .
In answer they said to him , Our father is Abraham . Jesus said to them , If you were Abraham's children you would do what Abraham did .
But now you have a desire to put me to death , a man who has said to you what is true , as I had it from God : Abraham did not do that .
You are doing the works of your father . They said to him , We are true sons of Abraham ; we have one Father , who is God .
Jesus said to them , If God was your Father you would have love for me , because it was from God I came and am here . I did not come of myself , but he sent me .
Why are my words not clear to you ? It is because your ears are shut to my teaching .
You are the children of your father the Evil One and it is your pleasure to do his desires . From the first he was a taker of life ; and he did not go in the true way because there is no true thing in him . When he says what is false , it is natural to him , for he is false and the father of what is false .
But because I say what is true , you have no belief in me .
Which of you is able truly to say that I am a sinner ? If I say what is true , why have you no belief in me ?
He who is a child of God gives ear to the words of God : your ears are not open to them because you are not from God .
The Jews said to him in answer , Are we not right in saying that you are of Samaria and have an evil spirit ?
And this was the answer of Jesus : I have not an evil spirit ; but I give honour to my Father and you do not give honour to me .
I , however , am not in search of glory for myself : there is One who is searching for it and he is judge .
Truly I say to you , If a man keeps my word he will never see death .
The Jews said to him , Now we are certain that you have an evil spirit . Abraham is dead , and the prophets are dead ; and you say , If a man keeps my word he will never see death .
Are you greater than our father Abraham , who is dead ? and the prophets are dead : who do you say that you are ?
Jesus said in answer , If I take glory for myself , my glory is nothing : it is my Father who gives me glory , of whom you say that he is your God .
You have no knowledge of him , but I have knowledge of him ; and if I said I have no knowledge of him I would be talking falsely like you : but I have full knowledge of him , and I keep his word .
Your father Abraham was full of joy at the hope of seeing my day : he saw it and was glad .
Then the Jews said to him , You are not fifty years old ; have you seen Abraham ?
Jesus said to them , Truly I say to you , Before Abraham came into being , I am .
So they took up stones to send at him : but Jesus got secretly out of their way and went out of the Temple .
And when he went on his way , he saw a man blind from birth .
And his disciples put a question to him , saying , Master , was it because of this man's sin , or the sin of his father and mother , that he has been blind from birth ?
Jesus said in answer , It was not because of his sin , or because of his father's or mother's ; it was so that the works of God might be seen openly in him .
While it is day we have to do the works of him who sent me : the night comes when no work may be done .
As long as I am in the world , I am the light of the world .
Having said these words , he put earth , mixed with water from his mouth , on the man's eyes ,
And said to him , Go and make yourself clean in the bath of Siloam (the sense of the name is , Sent) . So he went away and , after washing , came back able to see .
Then the neighbours and others who had seen him before in the street , with his hand out for money , said , Is not this the man who got money from people ?
Some said , It is he : others said , No , but he is like him . He said , I am he .
So they said to him , How then were your eyes made open ?
His answer was : The man who is named Jesus put earth mixed with water on my eyes , and said to me , Go and make yourself clean in Siloam : so I went away and , after washing , am now able to see .
And they said to him , Where is he ? His answer was : I have no knowledge .
They took him before the Pharisees--this man who had been blind .
Now the day on which the earth was mixed by Jesus and the man's eyes were made open was the Sabbath .
So the Pharisees put more questions to him about how his eyes had been made open . And he said to them , He put earth on my eyes , and I had a wash and am able to see .
Then some of the Pharisees said , That man has not come from God , for he does not keep the Sabbath . Others said , How is it possible for a sinner to do such signs ? So there was a division among them .
Again they said to the blind man , What have you to say about him for opening your eyes ? And he said , He is a prophet .
Now the Jews had no belief in the statement that he had been blind and was now able to see , till they sent for the father and mother of the man whose eyes had been made open ,
And put the question to them , saying , Is this your son , of whom you say that he was blind at birth ? how is it then that he is now able to see ?
In answer his father and mother said , We are certain that this is our son and that he was blind at birth :
But how it is he is now able to see , or who made his eyes open , we are not able to say : put the question to him ; he is old enough to give an answer for himself .
They said this because of their fear of the Jews : for the Jews had come to an agreement that if any man said that Jesus was the Christ he would be put out of the Synagogue .
That was the reason why they said , He is old enough ; put the question to him .
So they sent a second time for the man who had been blind and they said to him , Give glory to God : it is clear to us that this man is a sinner .
He said in answer , I have no knowledge if he is a sinner or not , but one thing I am certain about ; I was blind , and now I see .
Then they said to him , What did he do to you ? how did he give you the use of your eyes ?
His answer was : I have said it before , but your ears were shut : why would you have me say it again ? is it your desire to become his disciples ?
And they were angry with him and said , You are his disciple ? but we are disciples of Moses .
We are certain that God gave his word to Moses : but as for this man , we have no knowledge where he comes from .
The man said in answer , Why , here is a strange thing ! You have no knowledge where he comes from though he gave me the use of my eyes .
We have knowledge that God does not give ear to sinners , but if any man is a worshipper of God and does his pleasure , to him God's ears are open .
In all the years nobody has ever before seen the eyes of a man blind from birth made open .
If this man did not come from God he would be unable to do anything .
Their answer was : You came to birth through sin ; do you make yourself our teacher ? And they put him out of the Synagogue .
It came to the ears of Jesus that they had put him out , and meeting him he said , Have you faith in the Son of man ?
He said in answer , And who is he , Lord ? Say , so that I may have faith in him .
Jesus said to him , You have seen him ; it is he who is talking to you .
And he said , Lord , I have faith . And he gave him worship .
And Jesus said , I came into this world to be a judge , so that those who do not see may see , and those who see may become blind .
These words came to the ears of the Pharisees who were with him and they said to him , Are we , then , blind ?
Jesus said to them , If you were blind you would have no sin : but now that you say , We see ; your sin is there still .
Truly I say to you , He who does not go through the door into the place where the sheep are kept , but gets in by some other way , is a thief and an outlaw .
He who goes in by the door is the keeper of the sheep .
The porter lets him in ; and the sheep give ear to his voice ; he says over the names of the sheep , and takes them out .
When he has got them all out , he goes before them , and the sheep go after him , for they have knowledge of his voice .
They will not go after another who is not their keeper , but will go from him in flight , because his voice is strange to them .
In this Jesus was teaching them in the form of a story : but what he said was not clear to them .
So Jesus said again , Truly I say to you , I am the door of the sheep .
All who came before me are thieves and outlaws : but the sheep did not give ear to them .
I am the door : if any man goes in through me he will have salvation , and will go in and go out , and will get food .
The thief comes only to take the sheep and to put them to death : he comes for their destruction : I have come so that they may have life and have it in greater measure .
I am the good keeper of sheep : the good keeper gives his life for the sheep .
He who is a servant , and not the keeper or the owner of the sheep , sees the wolf coming and goes in flight , away from the sheep ; and the wolf comes down on them and sends them in all directions :
Because he is a servant he has no interest in the sheep .
I am the good keeper ; I have knowledge of my sheep , and they have knowledge of me ,
Even as the Father has knowledge of me and I of the Father ; and I am giving my life for the sheep .
And I have other sheep which are not of this field : I will be their guide in the same way , and they will give ear to my voice , so there will be one flock and one keeper .
For this reason am I loved by the Father , because I give up my life so that I may take it again .
No one takes it away from me ; I give it up of myself . I have power to give it up , and I have power to take it again . These orders I have from my Father .
There was a division again among the Jews because of these words .
And a number of them said , He has an evil spirit and is out of his mind ; why do you give ear to him ?
Others said , These are not the words of one who has an evil spirit . Is it possible for an evil spirit to make blind people see ?
Then came the feast of the opening of the Temple in Jerusalem : it was winter ;
And Jesus was walking in the Temple , in Solomon's covered way .
Then the Jews came round him , saying , how long are you going to keep us in doubt ? If you are the Christ , say so clearly .
Jesus said in answer , I have said it and you have no belief : the works which I do in my Father's name , these give witness about me .
But you have no belief because you are not of my sheep .
My sheep give ear to my voice , and I have knowledge of them , and they come after me :
And I give them eternal life ; they will never come to destruction , and no one will ever take them out of my hand .
That which my Father has given to me has more value than all ; and no one is able to take anything out of the Father's hand .
I and my Father are one .
Then the Jews took up stones again to send at him .
Jesus said to them in answer , I have let you see a number of good works from the Father ; for which of those works are you stoning me ?
This was their answer : We are not stoning you for a good work but for evil words ; because being a man you make yourself God .
In answer , Jesus said , Is there not a saying in your law , I said , You are gods ?
If he said they were gods , to whom the word of God came (and the Writings may not be broken) ,
Do you say of him whom the Father made holy and sent into the world , Your words are evil ; because I said , I am God's Son ?
If I am not doing the works of my Father , do not have belief in me ;
But if I am doing them , then have belief in the works even if you have no belief in me ; so that you may see clearly and be certain that the Father is in me and I am in the Father .
Then again they made an attempt to take him ; but he got away from them .
And he went again to the other side of the Jordan , to the place where John first gave baptism ; and he was there for a time .
And a great number of people came to him , saying , John did no sign : but everything John said of this man was true .
And a number came to have faith in him there .
Now a certain man named Lazarus was ill ; he was of Bethany , the town of Mary and her sister Martha .
The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill , was the Mary who put perfumed oil on the Lord and made his feet dry with her hair .
So the sisters sent to him , saying , Lord , your dear friend is ill .
When this came to his ears , Jesus said , The end of this disease is not death , but the glory of God , so that the Son of God may have glory because of it .
Now Jesus had love in his heart for Martha and her sister and Lazarus .
So when the news came to him that Lazarus was ill , he did not go from the place where he was for two days .
Then after that time he said to his disciples , Let us go into Judaea again .
The disciples said to him , Master , the Jews were attempting only the other day to have you stoned , and are you going back there again ?
Then Jesus said in answer , Are there not twelve hours in the day ? A man may go about in the day without falling , because he sees the light of this world .
But if a man goes about in the night , he may have a fall because the light is not in him .
These things said he : and after that he said to them , Lazarus our friend is at rest ; but I go so that I may make him come out of his sleep .
Then his disciples said to him , Lord , if he is resting he will get well .
Jesus , however , was talking of his death : but they had the idea that he was talking about taking rest in sleep .
Then Jesus said to them clearly , Lazarus is dead .
And because of you I am glad I was not there , so that you may have faith ; but let us go to him .
Then Thomas , who was named Didymus , said to the other disciples , Let us go so that we may be with him in death .
Now when Jesus came , he made the discovery that Lazarus had been put into the earth four days before .
Now Bethany was near to Jerusalem , about two miles away ;
And a number of Jews had come to Martha and Mary to give them comfort about their brother .
When Martha had the news that Jesus was on the way , she went out to him , but Mary did not go from the house .
Then Martha said to Jesus , Lord , if you had been here my brother would not be dead .
But I am certain that , even now , whatever request you make to God , God will give it to you .
Jesus said to her , Your brother will come to life again .
Martha said to him , I am certain that he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last day .
Jesus said to her , I am myself that day and that life ; he who has faith in me will have life even if he is dead ;
And no one who is living and has faith in me will ever see death . Is this your faith ?
She said to him , Yes , Lord : my faith is that you are the Christ , the Son of God , who was to come into the world .
And having said this , she went away and said secretly to her sister Mary , The Master is here and has sent for you .
And Mary , hearing this , got up quickly and went to him .
Now Jesus had not at this time come into the town , but was still in the place where Martha had seen him .
Then the Jews who were with her in the house , comforting her , when they saw Mary get up quickly and go out , went after her in the belief that she was going to the place of the dead and would be weeping there .
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him , she went down at his feet , saying , Lord , if you had been here my brother would not be dead .
And when Jesus saw her weeping , and saw the Jews weeping who came with her , his spirit was moved and he was troubled ,
And said , Where have you put him ? They said , Come and see , Lord .
And Jesus himself was weeping .
So the Jews said , See how dear he was to him !
But some of them said , This man , who made open the eyes of the blind man , was he not able to keep his friend from death ?
So Jesus , deeply troubled in heart , came to the place of the dead . It was a hole in the rock , and a stone was over the opening .
Jesus said , Take away the stone . Martha , the sister of him who was dead , said , Lord , by this time the body will be smelling , for he has been dead four days .
Jesus said to her , Did I not say to you that if you had faith you would see the glory of God ?
So they took away the stone . And Jesus , looking up to heaven , said , Father , I give praise to you for hearing me .
I was certain that your ears are at all times open to me , but I said it because of these who are here , so that they may see that you sent me .
Then he said in a loud voice , Lazarus , come out !
And he who was dead came out , with linen bands folded tightly about his hands and feet , and a cloth about his face . Jesus said to them , Make him free and let him go .
Then a number of the Jews who had come to Mary and had seen the things which Jesus did had belief in him .
But some of them went to the Pharisees with the news of what Jesus had done .
Then the high priests and the Pharisees had a meeting and said , What are we doing ? This man is doing a number of signs .
If we let him go on in this way , everybody will have belief in him and the Romans will come and take away our place and our nation .
But one of them , Caiaphas , who was high priest that year , said to them , You have no knowledge of anything ;
You do not see that it is in your interest for one man to be put to death for the people , so that all the nation may not come to destruction .
He did not say this of himself , but being the high priest that year he said , as a prophet , that Jesus would be put to death for the nation ;
And not for that nation only , but for the purpose of uniting in one body the children of God all over the world .
And from that day they took thought together how to put him to death .
So Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews , but went from there into the country near to the waste land , to a town named Ephraim , where he was for some time with the disciples .
Now the Passover of the Jews was near , and numbers of people went up from the country to Jerusalem to make themselves clean before the Passover .
They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another while they were in the Temple , What is your opinion ? Will he not come to the feast ?
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone had knowledge where he was , he was to give them word , so that they might take him .
Then , six days before the Passover , Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was , whom Jesus had made to come back from the dead .
So they made him a meal there , and he was waited on by Martha , and Lazarus was among those who were seated with him at table .
Then Mary , taking a pound of perfumed oil of great value , put it on the feet of Jesus and made them dry with her hair : and the house became full of the smell of the perfume .
But one of his disciples , Judas Iscariot (who was to give him up) , said ,
Why was not this perfume traded for three hundred pence , and the money given to the poor ?
He said this , not because he had any love for the poor ; but because he was a thief , and , having the money-bag , took for himself what was put into it .
Then Jesus said , Let her be . Let her keep what she has for the day of my death .
The poor you have ever with you , but me you have not for ever .
Then a great number of the Jews had news that he was there : and they came , not only because of Jesus , but so that they might see Lazarus who had been dead and to whom he had given life .
Now there was talk among the chief priests of putting Lazarus to death ;
For because of him a great number of the Jews went away and had belief in Jesus .
The day after , a great number of people who were there for the feast , when they had the news that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem ,
Took branches of palm-trees and went out to him , crying , A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord , the King of Israel !
And Jesus saw a young ass and took his seat on it ; as the Writings say ,
Have no fear , daughter of Zion : see your King is coming , seated on a young ass .
These things were not clear to his disciples at first : but when Jesus had been lifted up into his glory , then it came to their minds that these things in the Writings were about him and that they had been done to him .
Now the people who were with him when his voice came to Lazarus in the place of the dead , and gave him life again , had been talking about it .
And that was the reason the people went out to him , because it had come to their ears that he had done this sign .
Then the Pharisees said one to another , You see , you are unable to do anything : the world has gone after him .
Now there were some Greeks among the people who had come up to give worship at the feast :
They came to Philip , who was of Beth-saida in Galilee , and made a request , saying , Sir , we have a desire to see Jesus .
Philip went and gave word of it to Andrew ; and Andrew went with Philip to Jesus .
And Jesus said to them in answer , The hour of the glory of the Son of man has come .
Truly I say to you , If a seed of grain does not go into the earth and come to an end , it is still a seed and no more ; but through its death it gives much fruit .
He who is in love with life will have it taken from him ; and he who has no care for his life in this world will keep it for ever and ever .
If any man is my servant , let him come after me ; and where I am , there will my servant be . If any man becomes my servant , my Father will give him honour .
Now is my soul troubled ; and what am I to say ? Father , keep me from this hour ? No : for this purpose have I come to this hour .
Father , give glory to your name . Then there came a voice out of heaven , saying , I have given it glory , and I will give it glory again .
Hearing the sound , a number of people who were there said that it was thunder : others said , An angel was talking to him .
Jesus said in answer , This voice came not for me but for you .
Now is this world to be judged : now will the ruler of this world be sent out .
And I , if I am lifted up from the earth , will make all men come to me .
This he said , pointing to the sort of death he would have .
Then the people in answer said to him , The law says that the Christ will have life without end : how say you then that it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up ? Who is this Son of man ?
Jesus said to them , For a little time longer the light will be among you ; while you have the light go on walking in it , so that the dark may not overtake you : one walking in the dark has no knowledge of where he is going .
In so far as you have the light , put your faith in the light so that you may become sons of light . With these words Jesus went away and for a time was not seen again by them .
But though he had done such a number of signs before them , they still had no belief in him :
So that the words of the prophet Isaiah might come true , when he said , Lord , who has any belief in our preaching ? and the arm of the Lord , to whom has it been unveiled ?
For this reason they were unable to have belief , because Isaiah said again ,
He has made their eyes blind , and their hearts hard ; for fear that they might see with their eyes and get knowledge with their hearts , and be changed , and I might make them well .
Isaiah said these words because he saw his glory . His words were about him .
However , a number even of the rulers had belief in him , but because of the Pharisees they did not say so openly for fear that they might be shut out from the Synagogue :
For the praise of men was dearer to them than the approval of God .
Then Jesus said with a loud voice , He who has faith in me , has faith not in me , but in him who sent me .
And he who sees me , sees him who sent me .
I have come as a light into the world , so that no one who has faith in me will go on living in the dark .
And if any man gives ear to my words and does not keep them , I am not his judge : I did not come to be judge of the world but to give salvation to the world .
He who puts me on one side and does not take my words to heart , is not without a judge : the word which I have said will be his judge on the last day .
For I have not said it on my authority , but the Father who sent me gave me orders what to say and how to say it .
And I have knowledge that his order is eternal life : so that the things which I say , I say them even as the Father says them to me .
Now before the feast of the Passover , it was clear to Jesus that the time had come for him to go away from this world to the Father . Having once had love for those in the world who were his , his love for them went on to the end .
So while a meal was going on , the Evil One having now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot , Simon's son , to be false to him ,
Jesus , being conscious that the Father had put everything into his hands , and that he came from God and was going to God ,
Got up from table , put off his robe and took a cloth and put it round him .
Then he put water into a basin and was washing the feet of the disciples and drying them with the cloth which was round him .
So he came to Simon Peter . Peter said , Lord , are my feet to be washed by you ?
And Jesus , answering , said to him , What I do is not clear to you now , but it will be clear to you in time to come .
Peter said , I will never let my feet be washed by you , never . Jesus said in answer , If I do not make you clean you have no part with me .
Simon Peter said to him , Lord , not my feet only , but my hands and my head .
Jesus said to him , He who is bathed has need only to have his feet washed and then he is clean all over : and you , my disciples , are clean , but not all of you .
(He had knowledge who was false to him ; that is why he said , You are not all clean .)
Then , after washing their feet and putting on his robe again , he took his seat and said to them , Do you see what I have done to you ?
You give me the name of Master and Lord : and you are right ; that is what I am .
If then I , the Lord and the Master , have made your feet clean , it is right for you to make one another's feet clean .
I have given you an example , so that you may do what I have done to you .
Truly I say to you , A servant is not greater than his lord ; and he who is sent is not greater than the one who sent him .
If these things are clear to you , happy are you if you do them .
I am not talking of you all : I have knowledge of my true disciples , but things are as they are , so that the Writings may come true , The foot of him who takes bread with me is lifted up against me .
From this time forward , I give you knowledge of things before they come about , so that when they come about you may have belief that I am he .
Truly I say to you , He who takes to his heart anyone whom I send , takes me to his heart ; and he who so takes me , takes him who sent me .
When Jesus had said this he was troubled in spirit , and gave witness , saying , Truly I say to you , that one of you will be false to me .
Then the eyes of the disciples were turned on one another , in doubt as to whom he had in mind .
There was at table one of his disciples , the one dear to Jesus , resting his head on Jesus' breast .
Making a sign to him , Simon Peter said , Who is it he is talking about ?
He , then , resting his head on Jesus' breast , said to him , Lord , who is it ?
This was the answer Jesus gave : It is the one to whom I will give this bit of bread after I have put it in the vessel . Then he took the bit of bread , put it into the vessel , and gave it to Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot .
And when Judas took the bread Satan went into him . Then Jesus said to him , Do quickly what you have to do .
Now it was not clear to anyone at table why he said this to him .
Some were of the opinion that because Judas kept the money-bag Jesus said to him , Get the things we have need of for the feast ; or , that he was to give something to the poor .
So Judas , having taken the bit of bread , straight away went out : and it was night .
Then when he had gone out , Jesus said , Now is glory given to the Son of man , and God is given glory in him .
If God is given glory in him , God will give him glory in himself , and will give him glory even now .
My dear children , I am only to be with you a little longer . Then you will be looking for me : and as I said to the Jews , so now I say to you , Where I am going you may not come .
I give you a new law : Have love one for another ; even as I have had love for you , so are you to have love one for another .
By this it will be clear to all men that you are my disciples , if you have love one for another .
Simon Peter said to him , Lord , where are you going ? Jesus said in answer , Where I am going you may not come with me now , but you will come later .
Peter said to him , Why may I not come with you even now ? I will give up my life for you .
Jesus said in answer , Will you give up your life for me ? Truly I say to you , Before the cry of the cock you will have said three times that you are not my disciple .
Let not your heart be troubled : have faith in God and have faith in me .
In my Father's house are rooms enough ; if it was not so , would I have said that I am going to make ready a place for you ?
And if I go and make ready a place for you , I will come back again and will take you to be with me , so that you may be where I am .
And you all have knowledge of where I am going , and of the way to it .
Thomas said , Lord , we have no knowledge of where you are going ; how may we have knowledge of the way ?
Jesus said to him , I am the true and living way : no one comes to the Father but by me .
If you had knowledge of me , you would have knowledge of my Father : you have knowledge of him now and have seen him .
Philip said to him , Lord , let us see the Father , and we have need of nothing more .
Jesus said to him , Philip , have I been with you all this time , and still you have no knowledge of me ? He who has seen me has seen the Father . Why do you say , Let us see the Father ?
Have you not faith that I am in the Father and the Father is in me ? The words which I say to you , I say not from myself : but the Father who is in me all the time does his works .
Have faith that I am in the Father and that the Father is in me : at least , have faith in me because of what I do .
Truly I say to you , He who puts his faith in me will do the very works which I do , and he will do greater things than these , because I am going to my Father .
And whatever request you make in my name , that I will do , so that the Father may have glory in the Son .
If you make any request to me in my name , I will do it .
If you have love for me , you will keep my laws .
And I will make prayer to the Father and he will give you another Helper to be with you for ever ,
Even the Spirit of true knowledge . That Spirit the world is not able to take to its heart because it sees him not and has no knowledge of him : but you have knowledge of him , because he is ever with you and will be in you .
I will not let you be without a friend : I am coming to you .
A little time longer , and the world will see me no more ; but you will see me ; and you will be living because I am living .
At that time it will be clear to you that I am in my Father , and you are in me , and I in you .
He who has my laws and keeps them , he it is who has love for me : and he who has love for me will be loved by my Father , and I will have love for him and will let myself be seen clearly by him .
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him , How is it that you will let yourself be seen clearly by us and not by the world ?
Jesus said to him in answer , If anyone has love for me , he will keep my words : and he will be dear to my Father ; and we will come to him and make our living-place with him .
He who has no love for me does not keep my words ; and the word which you are hearing is not my word but the Father's who sent me .
I have said all this to you while I am still with you .
But the Helper , the Holy Spirit , whom the Father will send in my name , will be your teacher in all things and will put you in mind of everything I have said to you .
May peace be with you ; my peace I give to you : I give it not as the world gives . Let not your heart be troubled ; let it be without fear .
Keep in mind how I said to you , I go away and come to you again . If you had love for me you would be glad , because I am going to the Father : for the Father is greater than I .
And now I have given you word of it before it comes , so that , when it comes , you may have faith .
After this I will not say much to you , because the ruler of this world comes : and he has no power over me ;
But he comes so that the world may see that I have love for the Father , and that I am doing as I am ordered by the Father . Get up , and let us go .
I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener .
He takes away every branch in me which has no fruit , and every branch which has fruit he makes clean , so that it may have more fruit .
You are clean , even now , through the teaching which I have given you .
Be in me at all times as I am in you . As the branch is not able to give fruit of itself , if it is not still on the vine , so you are not able to do so if you are not in me .
I am the vine , you are the branches : he who is in me at all times as I am in him , gives much fruit , because without me you are able to do nothing .
If a man does not keep himself in me , he becomes dead and is cut off like a dry branch ; such branches are taken up and put in the fire and burned .
If you are in me at all times , and my words are in you , then anything for which you make a request will be done for you .
Here is my Father's glory , in that you give much fruit and so are my true disciples .
Even as the Father has given me his love , so I have given my love to you : be ever in my love .
If you keep my laws , you will be ever in my love , even as I have kept my Father's laws , and am ever in his love .
I have said these things to you so that I may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete .
This is the law I give you : Have love one for another , even as I have love for you .
Greater love has no man than this , that a man gives up his life for his friends .
You are my friends , if you do what I give you orders to do .
No longer do I give you the name of servants ; because a servant is without knowledge of what his master is doing : I give you the name of friends , because I have given you knowledge of all the things which my Father has said to me .
You did not take me for yourselves , but I took you for myself ; and I gave you the work of going about and producing fruit which will be for ever ; so that whatever request you make to the Father in my name he may give it to you .
So this is my law for you : Have love one for another .
If you are hated by the world , keep in mind that I was hated by the world before you .
If you were of the world , you would be loved by the world : but because you are not of the world , but I have taken you out of the world , you are hated by the world .
Keep in mind the words I said to you , A servant is not greater than his lord . If they were cruel to me , they will be cruel to you ; if they kept my words , they will keep yours .
They will do all this to you because of my name--because they have no knowledge of him who sent me .
If I had not come and been their teacher they would have had no sin : but now they have no reason to give for their sin .
He who has hate for me has hate for my Father .
If I had not done among them the works which no other man ever did , they would have had no sin : but now they have seen , and they have had hate in their hearts for me and my Father .
This comes about so that the writing in their law may be made true , Their hate for me was without cause .
When the Helper comes , whom I will send to you from the Father even the Spirit of true knowledge who comes from the Father--he will give witness about me ;
And you , in addition , will give witness because you have been with me from the first .
I have said these things to you so that you may not be in doubt .
They will put you out of the Synagogues : yes , the time is coming when whoever puts you to death will have the belief that he is doing God's pleasure .
They will do these things to you because they have not had knowledge of the Father or of me .
I have said these things to you so that when the time comes , what I have said may come to your mind . I did not say them to you at the first , because then I was still with you .
But now I am going to him who sent me ; and not one of you says to me , Where are you going ?
But your hearts are full of sorrow because I have said these things .
But what I am saying is true : my going is for your good : for if I do not go away , the Helper will not come to you ; but if I go , I will send him to you .
And he , when he comes , will make the world conscious of sin , and of righteousness , and of being judged :
Of sin , because they have not faith in me ;
Of righteousness , because I go to the Father and you will see me no more ;
Of being judged , because the ruler of this world has been judged .
I have still much to say to you , but you are not strong enough for it now .
However , when he , the Spirit of true knowledge , has come , he will be your guide into all true knowledge : for his words will not come from himself , but whatever has come to his hearing , that he will say : and he will make clear to you the things to come .
He will give me glory , because he will take of what is mine , and make it clear to you .
Everything which the Father has is mine : that is why I say , He will take of what is mine and will make it clear to you .
After a little time you will see me no longer ; and then again , after a little time , you will see me .
So some of the disciples said one to another , What is this he is saying , After a little time , you will see me no longer ; and then again , after a little time , you will see me ? and , I am going to the Father ?
So they said again and again , What is this he is saying , A little time ? His words are not clear to us .
Jesus saw that they had a desire to put the question to him , so he said to them , Is this what you are questioning one with another , why I said , After a little time , you will see me no longer ; and then again , after a little time , you will see me ?
Truly I say to you , You will be weeping and sorrowing , but the world will be glad : you will be sad , but your sorrow will be turned into joy .
When a woman is about to give birth she has sorrow , because her hour is come ; but when she has given birth to the child , the pain is put out of her mind by the joy that a man has come into the world .
So you have sorrow now : but I will see you again , and your hearts will be glad , and no one will take away your joy .
And on that day you will put no questions to me . Truly I say to you , Whatever request you make to the Father , he will give it to you in my name .
Up to now you have made no request in my name : do so , and it will be answered , so that your hearts may be full of joy .
All this I have said to you in veiled language : but the time is coming when I will no longer say things in veiled language but will give you knowledge of the Father clearly .
In that day you will make requests in my name : and I do not say that I will make prayer to the Father for you ,
For the Father himself gives his love to you , because you have given your love to me and have had faith that I came from God .
I came out from the Father and have come into the world : again , I go away from the world and go to the Father .
His disciples said , Now you are talking clearly and not in veiled language .
Now we are certain that you have knowledge of all things and have no need for anyone to put questions to you : through this we have faith that you came from God .
Jesus made answer , Have you faith now ?
See , a time is coming , yes , it is now here , when you will go away in all directions , every man to his house , and I will be by myself : but I am not by myself , because the Father is with me .
I have said all these things to you so that in me you may have peace . In the world you have trouble : but take heart ! I have overcome the world .
Jesus said these things ; then , lifting his eyes to heaven , he said , Father , the time has now come ; give glory to your Son , so that the Son may give glory to you :
Even as you gave him authority over all flesh , to give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him .
And this is eternal life : to have knowledge of you , the only true God , and of him whom you have sent , even Jesus Christ .
I have given you glory on the earth , having done all the work which you gave me to do .
And now , Father , let me have glory with you , even that glory which I had with you before the world was .
I have given knowledge of your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world : yours they were , and you gave them to me , and they have kept your words .
Now it is clear to them that whatever you have given to me comes from you :
Because I have given them the words which you gave to me ; and they have taken them to heart , and have certain knowledge that I came from you , and they have faith that you sent me .
My prayer is for them : my prayer is not for the world , but for those whom you have given to me , because they are yours .
(All mine are yours , and yours are mine) and I have glory in them .
And now I will be no longer in the world , but they are in the world and I come to you . Holy Father , keep them in your name which you have given to me , so that they may be one even as we are one .
While I was with them I kept them safe in your name which you have given to me : I took care of them and not one of them has come to destruction , but only the son of destruction , so that the Writings might come true .
And now I come to you ; and these things I say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them .
I have given your word to them ; and they are hated by the world , because they are not of the world , even as I am not of the world .
My prayer is not that you will take them out of the world , but that you will keep them from the Evil One .
They are not of the world any more than I am of the world .
Make them holy by the true word : your word is the true word .
Even as you have sent me into the world , so I have sent them into the world .
And for them I make myself holy , so that they may be made truly holy .
My prayer is not for them only , but for all who will have faith in me through their word ;
May they all be one ! Even as you , Father , are in me and I am in you , so let them be in us , so that all men may come to have faith that you sent me .
And the glory which you have given to me I have given to them , so that they may be one even as we are one ;
I in them , and you in me , so that they may be made completely one , and so that it may become clear to all men that you have sent me and that they are loved by you as I am loved by you .
Father , it is my desire that these whom you have given to me may be by my side where I am , so that they may see my glory which you have given to me , because you had love for me before the world came into being .
Father of righteousness , I have knowledge of you , though the world has not ; and to these it is clear that you sent me ;
And I have given to them knowledge of your name , and will give it , so that the love which you have for me may be in them and I in them .
When Jesus had said these words he went out with his disciples over the stream Kedron to a garden , into which he went with his disciples .
And Judas , who was false to him , had knowledge of the place because Jesus went there frequently with his disciples .
So Judas , getting a band of armed men and police from the chief priests and Pharisees , went there with lights and with arms .
Then Jesus , having knowledge of everything which was coming on him , went forward and said to them , Who are you looking for ?
Their answer was , Jesus the Nazarene . Jesus said , I am he . And Judas , who was false to him , was there at their side .
And when he said to them , I am he , they went back , falling to the earth .
So again he put the question to them , Who are you looking for ? And they said , Jesus the Nazarene .
Jesus made answer , I have said that I am he ; if you are looking for me , let these men go away .
(He said this so that his words might come true , I have kept safe all those whom you gave to me .)
Then Simon Peter , who had a sword , took it out and gave the high priest's servant a blow , cutting off his right ear . The servant's name was Malchus .
Then Jesus said to Peter , Put back your sword : am I not to take the cup which my Father has given to me ?
Then the band and the chief captain and the police took Jesus and put cords round him .
They took him first to Annas , because Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was the high priest that year .
It was Caiaphas who had said to the Jews that it was in their interest for one man to be put to death for the people .
And Simon Peter went after Jesus with another disciple . Now that disciple was a friend of the high priest and he went in with Jesus into the house of the high priest ;
But Peter was kept outside at the door . Then this other disciple , who was a friend of the high priest , came out and had a word with the girl who kept the door , and took Peter in .
Then the girl who was the door-keeper said to Peter , Are you not one of this man's disciples ? In answer he said , I am not .
Now the servants and the police had made a fire of coals because it was cold ; they were warming themselves in front of it and Peter was there with them , warming himself .
Then the high priest put questions to Jesus about his disciples and his teaching .
Jesus made answer , I said things openly to the world at all times ; I have given my teaching in the Synagogues and in the Temple to which all the Jews come ; and I have said nothing secretly .
Why are you questioning me ? put questions to my hearers about what I have said to them : they have knowledge of what I said .
When he said this , one of the police by his side gave him a blow with his open hand , saying , Do you give such an answer to the high priest ?
Jesus said in answer , If I have said anything evil , give witness to the evil : but if I said what is true , why do you give me blows ?
Then Annas sent him chained to Caiaphas , the high priest .
But Simon Peter was still there warming himself by the fire . They said to him , Are you not one of his disciples ? He said , No , I am not .
One of the servants of the high priest , a relation of him whose ear had been cut off by Peter , said , Did I not see you with him in the garden ?
Then again Peter said , No . And straight away a cock gave its cry .
So they took Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the Praetorium . It was early . They themselves did not go into the Praetorium , so that they might not become unclean , but might take the Passover .
So Pilate came out to them and put the question : What have you to say against this man ?
They said to him in answer , If the man was not a wrongdoer we would not have given him up to you .
Then Pilate said to them , Take him yourselves and let him be judged by your law . But the Jews said to him , We have no right to put any man to death .
That the word of Jesus might come true , pointing to the sort of death he would have .
Then Pilate went back into the Praetorium and sent for Jesus and said to him , Are you the King of the Jews ?
Jesus made answer , Do you say this of yourself , or did others say it about me ?
Pilate said , Am I a Jew ? Your nation and the chief priests have given you into my hands : what have you done ?
Jesus said in answer , My kingdom is not of this world : if my kingdom was of this world , my disciples would have made a good fight to keep me out of the hands of the Jews : but my kingdom is not here .
Then Pilate said to him , Are you then a king ? Jesus made answer , You say that I am a king . For this purpose was I given birth , and for this purpose I came into the world , that I might give witness to what is true . Every lover of what is true gives ear to my voice .
Pilate said to him , what is true ? Having said this he went out again to the Jews and said to them , I see no wrong in him .
But every year you make a request to me to let a prisoner go free at the Passover . Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free ?
Then again they gave a loud cry , Not this man , but Barabbas . Now Barabbas was an outlaw .
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped with cords .
And the men of the army made a crown of thorns and put it on his head , and they put a purple robe on him .
And they kept coming and saying , Long life to the King of the Jews ! And they gave him blows with their hands .
And Pilate went out again and said to them , See , I let him come out to you to make it clear to you that I see no wrong in him .
Then Jesus came out with the crown of thorns and the purple robe . And Pilate said to them , Here is the man !
So when the chief priests and the police saw him they gave a loud cry , To the cross ! to the cross ! Pilate said to them , Take him yourselves and put him on the cross : I see no crime in him .
And the Jews made answer , We have a law , and by that law it is right for him to be put to death because he said he was the Son of God .
When this saying came to Pilate's ears his fear became greater ;
And he went again into the Praetorium and said to Jesus , Where do you come from ? But Jesus gave him no answer .
Then Pilate said to him , You say nothing to me ? is it not clear to you that I have power to let you go free and power to put you to death on the cross ?
Jesus gave this answer : You would have no power at all over me if it was not given to you by God ; so that he who gave me up to you has the greater sin .
Hearing this , Pilate had a desire to let him go free , but the Jews said in a loud voice , If you let this man go , you are not Caesar's friend : everyone who makes himself a king goes against Caesar .
So when these words came to Pilate's ear , he took Jesus out , seating himself in the judge's seat in a place named in Hebrew , Gabbatha , or the Stone Floor .
It was the day when they made ready for the Passover ; and it was about the sixth hour . And he said to the Jews , There is your King !
Then they gave a loud cry , Away with him ! away with him ! to the cross ! Pilate said to them , Am I to put your King to death on the cross ? The chief priests said in answer , We have no king but Caesar .
So then he gave him up to them to be put to death on the cross . And they took Jesus away ;
And he went out with his cross on him to the place which is named Dead Man's Head (in Hebrew , Golgotha) :
Where they put him on the cross with two others , one on this side and one on that , and Jesus in the middle .
And Pilate put on the cross a statement in writing . The writing was : JESUS THE NAZARENE , THE KING OF THE JEWS .
The writing was seen by a number of the Jews , for the place where Jesus was put to death on the cross was near the town ; and the writing was in Hebrew and Latin and Greek .
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate , Do not put , The King of the Jews , but , He said , I am the King of the Jews .
But Pilate made answer , What I have put in writing will not be changed .
And when Jesus was nailed to the cross , the men of the army took his clothing , and made a division of it into four parts , to every man a part , and they took his coat : now the coat was without a join , made out of one bit of cloth .
So they said among themselves , Let this not be cut up , but let us put it to the decision of chance and see who gets it . (They did this so that the Writings might come true , which say , They made a distribution of my clothing among them , and my coat they put to the decision of chance .) This was what the men of the army did .
Now by the side of the cross of Jesus were his mother , and his mother's sister Mary , the wife of Cleopas , and Mary Magdalene .
So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple who was dear to him , he said to his mother , Mother , there is your son !
Then he said to the disciple , There is your mother ! And from that hour the disciple took her to his house .
After this , being conscious that all things had now been done so that the Writings might come true , Jesus said , Give me water .
Now there was a vessel ready , full of bitter wine , and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to his mouth .
So when Jesus had taken the wine he said , All is done . And with his head bent he gave up his spirit .
Now it was the day of getting ready for the Passover , and so that the bodies might not be on the cross on the Sabbath (because the day of that Sabbath was a great day) , the Jews made a request to Pilate that their legs might be broken , and that they might be taken away .
So the men of the army came , and the legs of the first were broken and then of the other who was put to death on the cross with Jesus :
But when they came to Jesus , they saw that he was dead by this time , and so his legs were not broken ;
But one of the men made a wound in his side with a spear , and straight away there came out blood and water .
And he who saw it has given witness (and his witness is true ; he is certain that what he says is true) so that you may have belief .
These things came about so that the Writings might be true , No bone of his body will be broken .
And again another verse says , They will see him who was wounded by their spears .
After these things , Joseph of Arimathaea , who was a disciple of Jesus , but secretly for fear of the Jews , made a request to Pilate to let him take away the body of Jesus : and Pilate said he might do so . So he went and took away his body .
And Nicodemus came (he who had first come to Jesus by night) with a roll of myrrh and aloes mixed , about a hundred pounds .
Then they took the body of Jesus , folding linen about it with the spices , as is the way of the Jews when they put the dead to rest .
Now there was a garden near the cross , and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man had ever been put .
So they put Jesus there , because it was the Jews' day of getting ready for the Passover , and the place was near .
Now on the first day of the week , very early , while it was still dark , Mary Magdalene came to the place and saw that the stone had been taken away from it .
Then she went running to Simon Peter , and to the other disciple who was loved by Jesus , and said to them , They have taken away the Lord out of the place of the dead and we have no knowledge where they have put him .
So Peter and the other disciple went out to the place of the dead .
They went running together , and the other disciple got in front of Peter and came first to the hole in the rock ;
And looking in , he saw the linen bands on the earth ; but he did not go in ,
Then Simon Peter came after him and went into the hole in the rock ; and he saw the linen bands on the earth ,
And the cloth , which had been round his head , not with the linen bands but rolled up in a place by itself .
Then the other disciple who came there first went in ; and he saw and belief came to him .
For at that time they had no knowledge that the Writings said that he would have to come again from the dead .
So then the disciples went away again to their houses .
But Mary was still there outside the hole in the rock , weeping ; and while she was weeping and looking into the hole ,
She saw two angels in white seated where the body of Jesus had been , one at the head and the other at the feet .
They said to her , Woman , why are you weeping ? She said to them , Because they have taken away my Lord , and I have no knowledge where they have put him .
And then looking round , she saw Jesus there , but had no idea that it was Jesus .
Jesus said to her , Woman , why are you weeping ? who are you looking for ? She , taking him for the gardener , said to him , Sir , if you have taken him away from here , say where you have put him and I will take him away .
Jesus said to her , Mary ! Turning , she said to him in Hebrew , Rabboni ! (which is to say , Master) .
Jesus said to her , Do not put your hand on me , for I have not gone up to the Father : but go to my brothers and say to them , I go up to my Father and your Father , to my God and your God .
Mary Magdalene went with the news to the disciples , and said she had seen the Lord and that he had said these things to her .
At evening on that day , the first day of the week , when , for fear of the Jews , the doors were shut where the disciples were , Jesus came among them and said to them , May peace be with you !
And when he had said this , he let them see his hands and his side . Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord .
And Jesus said to them again , May peace be with you ! As the Father sent me , even so I now send you .
And when he had said this , breathing on them , he said to them , Let the Holy Spirit come on you :
Any to whom you give forgiveness , will be made free from their sins ; and any from whom you keep back forgiveness , will still be in their sins .
Now Thomas , one of the twelve , named Didymus , was not with them when Jesus came .
So the other disciples said to him , We have seen the Lord . But he said to them , If I do not see in his hands the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of the nails , and if I do not put my hand into his side , I will never have belief .
And after eight days , his disciples were again in the house and Thomas was with them . Though the doors were shut , Jesus came , and taking his place in the middle of them , he said , May peace be with you !
Then he said to Thomas , Put out your finger , and see my hands ; and put your hand here into my side : and be no longer in doubt but have belief .
And Thomas said in answer , My Lord and my God !
Jesus said to him , Because you have seen me you have belief : a blessing will be on those who have belief though they have not seen me !
A number of other signs Jesus did before his disciples which are not recorded in this book :
But these are recorded , so that you may have faith that Jesus is the Christ , the Son of God , and so that , having this faith you may have life in his name .
After these things Jesus let himself be seen again by the disciples at the sea of Tiberias ; and it came about in this way .
Simon Peter , Thomas named Didymus , Nathanael of Cana in Galilee , the sons of Zebedee , and two others of his disciples were all together .
Simon Peter said to them , I am going fishing . They said to him , And we will come with you . They went out and got into the boat ; but that night they took no fish .
Now very early in the morning Jesus was there by the edge of the sea (though the disciples were not conscious that it was Jesus) .
So Jesus said to them , Children , have you taken any fish ? They made answer , No .
And he said to them , Let down the net on the right side of the boat and you will get some . So they put it in the water and now they were not able to get it up again because of the great number of fish .
So the disciple who was dear to Jesus said to Peter , It is the Lord ! Hearing that it was the Lord , Peter put his coat round him (because he was not clothed) and went into the sea .
And the other disciples came in the little boat (they were not far from land , only about two hundred cubits off) pulling the net full of fish .
When they got to land , they saw a fire of coals there , with fish cooking on it , and bread .
Jesus said to them , Get some of the fish which you have now taken .
So Peter went to the boat and came back pulling the net to land , full of great fish , a hundred and fifty-three ; and though there was such a number the net was not broken .
Jesus said to them , Come and take some food . And all the disciples were in fear of putting the question , Who are you ? being conscious that it was the Lord .
Then Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them , and the fish in the same way .
Now this was the third time that Jesus let himself be seen by the disciples after he had come back from the dead .
Then when they had taken food , Jesus said to Simon Peter , Simon, son of John , is your love for me greater than the love of these others ? He said to him , Yes , Lord ; you are certain of my love for you . He said to him , Then give my lambs food .
Again , a second time , he said to him , Simon , son of John , have you any love for me ? Yes , Lord , he said , you are certain of my love for you . Then take care of my sheep , said Jesus .
He said to him a third time , Simon , son of John , am I dear to you ? Now Peter was troubled in his heart because he put the question a third time , Am I dear to you ? And he said to him , Lord , you have knowledge of all things ; you see that you are dear to me . Jesus said to him , Then give my sheep food .
Truly I say to you , When you were young , you made yourself ready and went wherever you had a desire to go : but when you are old , you will put out your hands and another will make you ready , and you will be taken where you have no desire to go .
Now this he said , pointing out the sort of death by which he would give God glory . And after saying this , he said to him , Come after me .
Then Peter , turning round , saw the disciple who was dear to Jesus coming after them--the disciple who was resting on his breast at the last meal , and said , Lord , who is it who will be false to you ?
Seeing him , Peter said to Jesus , What about this man ?
Jesus said to him , If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back , what is that to you ? come yourself after me .
So this saying went about among the brothers that this disciple would not undergo death : Jesus , however , did not say that he would not undergo death , but , If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back , what is that to you ?
This is the disciple who gives witness about these things and who put them in writing : and we have knowledge that his witness is true .
And Jesus did such a number of other things that , if every one was recorded , it is my opinion that even the world itself is not great enough for the books there would be .
I have given an earlier account , O Theophilus , of all the things which Jesus did , and of his teaching from the first ,
Till the day when he was taken up to heaven after he had given his orders , through the Holy Spirit , to the Apostles of whom he had made selection :
And to whom he gave clear and certain signs that he was living , after his death ; for he was seen by them for forty days , and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God :
And when they were all together , with him , he gave them orders not to go away from Jerusalem , but to keep there , waiting till the word of the Father was put into effect , of which , he said , I have given you knowledge :
For the baptism of John was with water , but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit , after a little time .
So , when they were together , they said to him , Lord , will you at this time give back the kingdom to Israel ?
And he said to them , It is not for you to have knowledge of the time and the order of events which the Father has kept in his control .
But you will have power , when the Holy Spirit has come on you ; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and all Judaea and Samaria , and to the ends of the earth .
And when he had said these things , while they were looking , he was taken up , and went from their view into a cloud .
And while they were looking up to heaven with great attention , two men came to them , in white clothing ,
And said , O men of Galilee , why are you looking up into heaven ? This Jesus , who was taken from you into heaven , will come again , in the same way as you saw him go into heaven .
Then they went back to Jerusalem from the mountain named Olivet , which is near Jerusalem , a Sabbath day's journey away .
And when they came in , they went up into the room where they were living ; Peter and John and James and Andrew , Philip and Thomas , Bartholomew and Matthew , James , the son of Alphaeus , and Simon the Zealot , and Judas , the son of James .
And they all with one mind gave themselves up to prayer , with the women , and Mary the mother of Jesus , and his brothers .
And in those days Peter got up among the brothers (there were about one hundred and twenty of them) , and said ,
My brothers , the word of God had to be put into effect , which the Holy Spirit had said before , by the mouth of David , about Judas , who was guide to those who took Jesus ,
For he was numbered among us , and had his part in our work .
Now this man , with the reward of his evil-doing , got for himself a field , and falling head first , came to a sudden and violent end there .
And this came to the knowledge of all those who were living in Jerusalem , so that the field was named in their language , Akel-dama , or , The field of blood .
For in the book of Psalms it says , Let his house be waste , and let no man be living in it : and , Let his position be taken by another .
For this reason , of the men who have been with us all the time , while the Lord Jesus went in and out among us ,
Starting from the baptism of John till he went up from us , one will have to be a witness with us of his coming back from death .
And they made selection of two , Joseph , named Barsabbas , whose other name was Justus , and Matthias .
And they made prayers and said , Lord , having knowledge of the hearts of all men , make clear which of these two has been marked out by you ,
To take that position as a servant and Apostle , from which Judas by his sin was shut out , so that he might go to his place .
And they put it to the decision of chance , and the decision was given for Matthias , and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles .
I have given an earlier account , O Theophilus , of all the things which Jesus did , and of his teaching from the first ,
Till the day when he was taken up to heaven after he had given his orders , through the Holy Spirit , to the Apostles of whom he had made selection :
And to whom he gave clear and certain signs that he was living , after his death ; for he was seen by them for forty days , and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God :
And when they were all together , with him , he gave them orders not to go away from Jerusalem , but to keep there , waiting till the word of the Father was put into effect , of which , he said , I have given you knowledge :
For the baptism of John was with water , but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit , after a little time .
So , when they were together , they said to him , Lord , will you at this time give back the kingdom to Israel ?
And he said to them , It is not for you to have knowledge of the time and the order of events which the Father has kept in his control .
But you will have power , when the Holy Spirit has come on you ; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and all Judaea and Samaria , and to the ends of the earth .
And when he had said these things , while they were looking , he was taken up , and went from their view into a cloud .
And while they were looking up to heaven with great attention , two men came to them , in white clothing ,
And said , O men of Galilee , why are you looking up into heaven ? This Jesus , who was taken from you into heaven , will come again , in the same way as you saw him go into heaven .
Then they went back to Jerusalem from the mountain named Olivet , which is near Jerusalem , a Sabbath day's journey away .
And when they came in , they went up into the room where they were living ; Peter and John and James and Andrew , Philip and Thomas , Bartholomew and Matthew , James , the son of Alphaeus , and Simon the Zealot , and Judas , the son of James .
And they all with one mind gave themselves up to prayer , with the women , and Mary the mother of Jesus , and his brothers .
And in those days Peter got up among the brothers (there were about one hundred and twenty of them) , and said ,
My brothers , the word of God had to be put into effect , which the Holy Spirit had said before , by the mouth of David , about Judas , who was guide to those who took Jesus ,
For he was numbered among us , and had his part in our work .
(Now this man , with the reward of his evil-doing , got for himself a field , and falling head first , came to a sudden and violent end there .
And this came to the knowledge of all those who were living in Jerusalem , so that the field was named in their language , Akel-dama , or , The field of blood .)
For in the book of Psalms it says , Let his house be waste , and let no man be living in it : and , Let his position be taken by another .
For this reason , of the men who have been with us all the time , while the Lord Jesus went in and out among us ,
Starting from the baptism of John till he went up from us , one will have to be a witness with us of his coming back from death .
And they made selection of two , Joseph , named Barsabbas , whose other name was Justus , and Matthias .
And they made prayers and said , Lord , having knowledge of the hearts of all men , make clear which of these two has been marked out by you ,
To take that position as a servant and Apostle , from which Judas by his sin was shut out , so that he might go to his place .
And they put it to the decision of chance , and the decision was given for Matthias , and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles .
And when the day of Pentecost was come , they were all together in one place .
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like the rushing of a violent wind , and all the house where they were was full of it .
And they saw tongues , like flames of fire , coming to rest on every one of them .
And they were all full of the Holy Spirit , and were talking in different languages , as the Spirit gave them power .
Now there were living at Jerusalem , Jews , God-fearing men , from every nation under heaven .
And when this sound came to their ears , they all came together , and were greatly surprised because every man was hearing the words of the disciples in his special language .
And they were full of wonder and said , Are not all these men Galilaeans ?
And how is it that every one of us is hearing their words in the language which was ours from our birth ?
Men of Parthia , Media , and Elam , and those living in Mesopotamia , in Judaea and Cappadocia , in Pontus and Asia ,
In Phrygia and Pamphylia , in Egypt and the parts of Libya about Cyrene , and those who have come from Rome , Jews by birth and others who have become Jews ,
Men of Crete and Arabia , to all of us they are talking in our different languages , of the great works of God .
And they were all surprised and in doubt saying to one another , What is the reason of this ?
But others , making sport of them , said , They are full of new wine .
But Peter , getting up , with the eleven , said in a loud voice , O men of Judaea , and all you who are living in Jerusalem , take note of this and give ear to my words .
For these men are not overcome with wine , as it seems to you , for it is only the third hour of the day ;
But this is the thing which was said by the prophet Joel ;
And it will come about , in the last days , says God , that I will send out my Spirit on all flesh ; and your sons and your daughters will be prophets , and your young men will see visions , and your old men will have dreams :
And on my men-servants and my women-servants I will send my Spirit , and they will be prophets .
And wonders will be seen in heaven , and signs on the earth , blood and fire and smoke :
The sun will become dark and the moon will be turned to blood , before that great day of the Lord comes in glory :
And whoever makes his prayer to the Lord will have salvation .
Men of Israel , give ear to these words : Jesus of Nazareth , a man who had the approval of God , as was made clear to you by the great works and signs and wonders which God did by him among you , as you yourselves have knowledge ,
Him , when he was given up , by the decision and knowledge of God , you put to death on the cross , by the hands of evil men :
But God gave him back to life , having made him free from the pains of death because it was not possible for him to be overcome by it .
For David said of him , I saw the Lord before my face at all times , for he is at my right hand , so that I may not be moved :
And for this cause my heart was glad and my tongue full of joy , and my flesh will be resting in hope :
For you will not let my soul be in hell and you will not give up your Holy One to destruction .
You have made me see the ways of life ; I will be full of joy when I see your face .
My brothers , I may say to you openly that David came to his death , and was put in the earth , and his resting-place is with us today .
But being a prophet , and having in mind the oath which God had given to him , that of the fruit of his body one would take his place as a king ,
He , having knowledge of the future , was talking of the coming again of Christ from the dead , that he was not kept in hell and his body did not see destruction .
This Jesus God has given back to life , of which we all are witnesses .
And so , being lifted up to the right hand of God , and having the Father's word that the Holy Spirit would come , he has sent this thing , which now you see and have knowledge of .
For David has not gone up into heaven , but says , himself , The Lord said to my Lord , Be seated at my right hand ,
Till I put all those who are against you under your feet .
For this reason , let all Israel be certain that this Jesus , whom you put to death on the cross , God has made Lord and Christ .
Now when these words came to their ears their hearts were troubled , and they said to Peter and the other Apostles , Brothers , what are we to do ?
And Peter said , Let your hearts be changed , every one of you , and have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ , for the forgiveness of your sins ; and you will have the Holy Spirit given to you .
For the word of God is for you and for your children and for all those who are far off , even all those who may be marked out by the Lord our God .
And with more such words he gave his witness , offering them salvation and saying , Come out from this evil generation .
Then those who gave hearing to his words had baptism : and about three thousand souls were joined to them that day .
And they kept their attention fixed on the Apostles' teaching and were united together in the taking of broken bread and in prayer .
But fear came on every soul : and all sorts of wonders and signs were done by the Apostles .
And all those who were of the faith kept together , and had all things in common ;
And exchanging their goods and property for money , they made division of it among them all , as they had need .
And day by day , going in agreement together regularly to the Temple and , taking broken bread together in their houses , they took their food with joy and with true hearts ,
Giving praise to God , and having the approval of all the people ; and every day the number of those who had salvation was increased by the Lord .
Now Peter and John were going up to the Temple at the ninth hour , the hour of prayer ;
And a certain man who from birth had had no power in his legs , was taken there every day , and put down at the door of the Temple which is named Beautiful , requesting money from those who went into the Temple ;
He then , seeing Peter and John going into the Temple , made a request to them .
And Peter , looking at him , with John , said , Keep your eyes on us .
And he gave attention to them , hoping to get something from them .
But Peter said , I have no silver or gold , but what I have , that I give to you . In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth , get up on your feet .
And he took him by his right hand , lifting him up ; and straight away his feet and the bones of his legs became strong ,
And , jumping up , he got on to his feet and went into the Temple with them , walking and jumping and giving praise to God .
And all the people saw him walking and praising God :
And they saw that it was the man who made requests for money at the door of the Temple , and they were full of wonder and surprise at what had taken place .
And while he kept his hands on Peter and John , all the people came running together to the covered way which is named Solomon's , full of wonder .
And when Peter saw it he said to the people , You men of Israel , why are you so greatly surprised at this man ? or why are you looking at us as if by our power or virtue we had given him the use of his legs ?
The God of Abraham , of Isaac , and of Jacob , the God of our fathers , has given glory to his servant Jesus ; whom you gave up , turning your backs on him , when Pilate had made the decision to let him go free .
But you would have nothing to do with the Holy and Upright One , and made request for a man of blood to be given to you ,
And put to death the Lord of life ; whom God gave back from the dead ; of which fact we are witnesses .
And his name , through faith in his name , has made this man strong , whom you see and have knowledge of : yes , the faith which is through him has made him well , before you all .
And now , my brothers , I am conscious that you did this , as did your rulers , without knowledge .
But the things which God had made clear before , by the mouth of all the prophets , that the Christ would have to undergo , he has put into effect in this way .
So then , let your hearts be changed and be turned to God , so that your sins may be completely taken away , and times of blessing may come from the Lord ;
And that he may send the Christ who was marked out for you from the first , even Jesus :
Who is to be kept in heaven till the time when all things are put right , of which God has given word by the mouth of his holy prophets , who have been from the earliest times .
For Moses said , The Lord will give you a prophet from among your people , like me ; you will give ear to everything which he will say to you .
And every soul who does not give attention to that prophet , will be cut off from among the people .
And all the prophets from Samuel and those who came after , every one of them , gave word of these days .
You are the sons of the prophets , and of the agreement which God made with your fathers , saying to Abraham , Through your seed a blessing will come on all the families of the earth .
To you , first , God sent his servant , blessing you by turning every one of you from his sins .
And while they were talking to the people , the priests and the captain of the Temple and the Sadducees came up to them ,
Being greatly troubled because they were teaching the people and preaching Jesus as an example of the coming back from the dead .
And they took them and put them in prison till the morning , for it was now evening .
But a number of those who gave hearing to the word had faith ; and they were now about five thousand .
And on the day after , the rulers and those in authority and the scribes came together in Jerusalem ;
And Annas , the high priest , was there , and Caiaphas and John and Alexander , and all the relations of the high priest .
Then sending for Peter and John , they said , By what power and in whose name have you done this ?
Then Peter , being full of the Holy Spirit , said to them , O you rulers of the people and men of authority ,
If we are questioned today about a good work done to a man who was ill , as to how he has been made well ,
Take note , all of you , and all the people of Israel , that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth , whom you put to death on the cross , whom God gave back from the dead , even through him is this man now before you completely well .
He is the stone which you builders had no use for , but which has been made the chief stone of the building .
And in no other is there salvation : for there is no other name under heaven , given among men , through which we may have salvation .
Now when they saw that Peter and John were without fear , though they were men of no education or learning , they were greatly surprised ; and they took note of them that they had been with Jesus .
And , seeing that the man who had been made well was there with them , they were not able to say anything against it .
But when they had given them orders to go out of the Sanhedrin , they had a discussion among themselves ,
Saying , What are we to do with these men ? for certainly it is clear to all who are living in Jerusalem that a most important sign has been done by them , and it is not possible to say that it is not so .
But so that it may not go farther among the people , let us put them in fear of punishment if they say anything in future in this name .
And they sent for them , and gave them orders not to make statements or give teaching in the name of Jesus .
But Peter and John in answer said to them , It is for you to say if it is right in the eyes of God to give attention to you more than to God :
For it is not possible for us to keep from saying what we have seen and have knowledge of .
And when they had said more sharp words to them , they let them go , not seeing what punishment they might give them , because of the people ; for all men were giving praise to God for what had taken place .
For the man on whom this act of power was done was more than forty years old .
And when they had been made free , they came back to their friends , and gave an account of all the things which the chief priests and the authorities had said to them .
And hearing it , they all , with one mind , made prayer to God and said , O Lord , maker of heaven and earth and the sea and all things in them :
Who has said , by the Holy Spirit , through the mouth of our father David your servant , Why are the nations so violently moved , and why are the thoughts of the people so foolish ?
The kings of the earth were lifted up , the rulers came together , against the Lord , and against his Christ :
For , truly , in this town , against your holy servant , Jesus , who was marked out by you as Christ , Herod , and Pontius Pilate , with the Gentiles and the people of Israel , came together ,
To do that which had been fixed before by your hand and your purpose .
And now , Lord , take note of their cruel words , and give your servants power to be preachers of your word without fear ,
While your hand is stretched out to do works of mercy ; so that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy servant Jesus .
And when their prayer was ended , the place where they were was violently moved , and they all became full of the Holy Spirit , preaching the word of God without fear .
And all those who were of the faith were one in heart and soul : and not one of them said that any of the things which he had was his property only ; but they had all things in common .
And with great power the Apostles gave witness of the coming back of the Lord Jesus from the dead ; and grace was on them all .
And no one among them was in need ; for everyone who had land or houses , exchanging them for money , took the price of them ,
And put it at the feet of the Apostles for distribution to everyone as he had need .
And Joseph , who was given by the Apostles the name of Barnabas (the sense of which is , Son of comfort) , a Levite and a man of Cyprus by birth ,
Having a field , got money for it and put the money at the feet of the Apostles .
But a certain man named Ananias , with Sapphira his wife , got money for his property ,
And kept back part of the price , his wife having knowledge of it , and took the rest and put it at the feet of the Apostles .
But Peter said , Ananias , why has the Evil One put it into your heart to be false to the Holy Spirit , and to keep back part of the price of the land ?
While you had it , was it not your property ? and after you had given it in exchange , was it not still in your power ? how has this purpose come into your mind ? you have been false , not to men , but to God .
And at these words , Ananias went down on the earth , and his life went from him : and great fear came on all who were present .
And the young men went and made ready his body , and took it out , and put it in the earth .
And about three hours after , his wife , having no knowledge of what had taken place , came in .
And Peter said to her , Give me an answer : was this amount of money the price of the land ? And she said , Yes , it was .
But Peter said to her , Why have you made an agreement together to be false to the Spirit of the Lord ? See , the feet of the young men who have put the body of your husband in the earth , are at the door , and they will take you out .
And straight away she went down at his feet , and her life went from her : and the young men came in and saw her dead , and they took her out and put her in the earth with her husband .
Then great fear came on all the church and on all who had knowledge of these things .
Now a number of signs and wonders were done among the people by the hands of the Apostles ; and they were all together in Solomon's covered way .
The others , in fear , kept back from joining them : but the people made much of them ;
And a great number of men and women had faith , and were joined to the Lord ;
And they even took into the streets people who were ill , and put them on beds , so that when Peter went by , some of them might be in his shade .
And numbers of people came together from the towns round about Jerusalem , with those who were ill and those who were troubled with unclean spirits : and they were all made well .
But the high priest and those who were with him (the Sadducees) were full of envy ,
And they took the Apostles and put them in the common prison .
But in the night an angel of the Lord , opening the doors of the prison , took them out and said ,
Go , take your place in the Temple and give the people all the teaching about this Life .
And hearing this , they went into the Temple at dawn , and were teaching . But the high priest and those who were with him got together the Sanhedrin and the representatives of the children of Israel , and sent to the prison to get them .
But the men who were sent saw that they were not in the prison , and came back with the news ,
Saying , The doors of the prison were safely shut , and the keepers were at the doors , but when they were open , there was nobody inside .
Now , at these words , the captain of the Temple and the chief priests were greatly troubled about what might be the end of this business .
And someone came and said to them , The men , whom you put in prison , are in the Temple teaching the people .
Then the captain and some of the police went and took them , but not violently , for fear that they might be stoned by the people .
And they took them into the Sanhedrin , and the high priest said to them ,
We gave you very clear orders not to give teaching in this name : and now Jerusalem is full of your teaching , and you are attempting to make us responsible for this man's death .
But Peter and the Apostles , answering , said , We have to do the orders of God , not of man .
The God of our fathers gave Jesus back to life , whom you had put to death , hanging him on a tree .
Him God has put on high at his right hand , as a Ruler and a Saviour , to give to Israel a change of heart and forgiveness of sins .
And we are witnesses of these things , and so is the Holy Spirit , whom God has given to those who keep his laws .
But when these words came to their ears , they were cut to the heart , and had a mind to put them to death .
But one of the Sanhedrin , a Pharisee named Gamaliel , a man of learning in the law , of whom all the people had a high opinion , got up and made a suggestion for the men to be put outside for a little time .
And he said to them , Men of Israel , take care what you do about these men .
For before this there was Theudas , who said he was someone important , to whom about four hundred men gave their support : he was put to death , and his band was broken up and came to nothing .
After this man , there was Judas of Galilee , at the time of the numbering , and some of the people went after him : he was put to death , and all his supporters were put to flight .
And now I say to you , Do nothing to these men , but let them be : for if this teaching or this work is of men , it will come to nothing :
But if it is of God , you will not be able to overcome them , and you are in danger of fighting against God .
And he seemed to them to be right : and they sent for the Apostles , and , after having them whipped and giving them orders to give no teaching in the name of Jesus , they let them go .
So they went away from the Sanhedrin , happy to undergo shame for the Name .
And every day , in the Temple and privately , they went on teaching and preaching Jesus as the Christ .
Now in those days , when the number of the disciples was increasing , protests were made by the Greek Jews against the Hebrews , because their widows were not taken care of in the distribution of food every day .
And the Apostles sent for all the disciples and said , It is not right for us to give up preaching the word of God in order to make distribution of food .
Take then from among you seven men of good name , full of the Spirit and of wisdom , to whom we may give control of this business .
Then we will give all our time to prayer and the teaching of the word .
And this saying was pleasing to all of them : and they made selection of Stephen , a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit , and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolas of Antioch , who had become a Jew :
These they took to the Apostles , who , after prayer , put their hands on them .
And the word of God was increasing in power ; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem became very great , and a great number of priests were in agreement with the faith .
And Stephen , full of grace and power , did great wonders and signs among the people .
But some of those who were of the Synagogue named that of the Libertines , and some of the men of Cyrene and of Alexandria and those from Cilicia and Asia , had arguments with Stephen .
But they were not able to get the better of him , for his words were full of wisdom and of the Spirit .
Then they got men to say , He has said evil against Moses and against God , in our hearing .
And the people , with the rulers and the scribes , were moved against him , and they came and took him before the Sanhedrin ,
And they got false witnesses who said , This man is for ever saying things against this holy place and against the law :
For he has said in our hearing that this Jesus of Nazareth will put this place to destruction and make changes in the rules which were handed down to us by Moses .
And all those who were in the Sanhedrin , looking at him , saw that his face was like the face of an angel .
Then the high priest said , Are these things true ?
And he said , My brothers and fathers , give hearing . The God of glory came to our father Abraham , when he was in Mesopotamia , before he was living in Haran ,
And said to him , Go out of your land , and away from your family , and come into the land to which I will be your guide .
Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans , and went into Haran ; and from there , when his father was dead , he was guided by God into this land , where you are living now :
And God gave him no heritage in it , not even enough to put his foot on : but he gave him an undertaking that he would give it to him and to his children after him , though he had no child at that time .
And God said that his seed would be living in a strange land , and that they would make them servants , and be cruel to them for four hundred years .
And I will be the judge , said God , of that nation which made them servants : and after that , they will come out and give me worship in this place .
And he made with him the agreement of which circumcision was the sign . And so Abraham had a son , Isaac , and gave him circumcision on the eighth day ; and Isaac had a son , Jacob , and Jacob was the father of the twelve heads of the families of Israel .
And the brothers , moved with envy against Joseph , gave him to the Egyptians for money : but God was with him ,
And made him free from all his troubles , and gave him wisdom and the approval of Pharaoh , king of Egypt , who made him ruler over Egypt and all his house .
Now there was no food to be had in all Egypt and Canaan , and there was great trouble : and our fathers were not able to get food .
But Jacob , hearing that there was grain in Egypt , sent out our fathers the first time .
And the second time his brothers had a meeting with Joseph , and Pharaoh had knowledge of Joseph's family .
Then Joseph sent for Jacob his father and all his family , seventy-five persons .
And Jacob went down to Egypt , and came to his end there , and so did our fathers ;
And they were taken over to Shechem , and put to rest in the place which Abraham got for a price in silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem .
But when the time was near for putting into effect the undertaking which God had given to Abraham , the people were increasing in Egypt ,
Till another king came to power , who had no knowledge of Joseph .
He , having evil designs against our nation , was cruel to our fathers , and they were forced to put out their young children , so that they might not go on living .
At which time Moses came to birth , and he was very beautiful ; and he was kept for three months in his father's house :
And when he was put out , Pharaoh's daughter took him and kept him as her son .
And Moses was trained in all the wisdom of Egypt , and was great in his words and works .
But when he was almost forty years old , it came into his heart to go and see his brothers , the children of Israel .
And seeing one of them being attacked , he went to his help and gave the Egyptian a death-blow :
And he was hoping that his brothers would see that God had sent him to be their saviour ; but they did not see .
And the day after , he came to them , while they were having a fight , and would have made peace between them , saying , Sirs , you are brothers ; why do you do wrong to one another ?
But the man who was doing wrong to his neighbour , pushing him away , said , Who made you a ruler and a judge over us ?
Will you put me to death as you did the Egyptian yesterday ?
And at these words , Moses went in flight to the land of Midian , and was living there for a time , and had two sons .
At the end of forty years , an angel came to him in the waste land of Sinai , in the flame of a burning thorn-tree .
And Moses , seeing it , was full of wonder , and when he came up to have a nearer view of it , the voice of the Lord came to him , saying ,
I am the God of your fathers , the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob . And Moses , shaking with fear , kept his eyes from looking at it .
And the Lord said , Take off the shoes from your feet , for the place where you are is holy .
Truly , I have seen the sorrows of my people in Egypt , and their cries have come to my ears , and I have come down to make them free : and now , come , I will send you to Egypt .
This Moses , whom they would not have , saying , Who made you a ruler and a judge ? him God sent to be a ruler and a saviour , by the hand of the angel whom he saw in the thorn-tree .
This man took them out , having done wonders and signs in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the waste land , for forty years .
This is the same Moses , who said to the children of Israel , God will give you a prophet from among your brothers , like me .
This is the man who was in the church in the waste land with the angel who was talking to him in Sinai , and with our fathers ; and to him were given the living words of God , so that he might give them to you .
By whom our fathers would not be controlled ; but they put him on one side , turning back in their hearts to Egypt ,
And saying to Aaron , Make us gods to go before us : as for this Moses , who took us out of the land of Egypt , we have no idea what has become of him .
And they made the image of a young ox in those days , and made an offering to it , and had joy in the work of their hands .
But God was turned from them and let them give worship to the stars of heaven , as it says in the book of the prophets , Did you make offerings to me of sheep and oxen for forty years in the waste land , O house of Israel ?
And you took up the tent of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan , images which you made to give worship to them : and I will take you away , farther than Babylon .
Our fathers had the Tent of witness in the waste land , as God gave orders to Moses to make it after the design which he had seen .
Which our fathers , in their turn , took with them when , with Joshua , they came into the heritage of the nations whom God was driving out before the face of our fathers , till the time of David ,
Who was pleasing to God ; and he had a desire to make a holy tent for the God of Jacob .
But Solomon was the builder of his house .
But still , the Most High has not his resting-place in houses made with hands , as the prophet says ,
Heaven is the seat of my power , and earth is a resting-place for my feet : what sort of house will you make for me ? says the Lord , or what is my place of rest ?
Did not my hand make all these things ?
You whose hearts are hard and whose ears are shut to me ; you are ever working against the Holy Spirit ; as your fathers did , so do you .
Which of the prophets was not cruelly attacked by your fathers ? and they put to death those who gave them the news of the coming of the Upright One ; whom you have now given up and put to death ;
You , to whom the law was given as it was ordered by angels , and who have not kept it .
Hearing these things , they were cut to the heart and moved with wrath against him .
But he was full of the Holy Spirit , and looking up to heaven , he saw the glory of God and Jesus at the right hand of God .
And he said , Now I see heaven open , and the Son of man at the right hand of God .
But with loud cries , and stopping their ears , they made an attack on him all together ,
Driving him out of the town and stoning him : and the witnesses put their clothing at the feet of a young man named Saul .
And Stephen , while he was being stoned , made prayer to God , saying , Lord Jesus , take my spirit .
And going down on his knees , he said in a loud voice , Lord , do not make them responsible for this sin . And when he had said this , he went to his rest .
And Saul gave approval to his death . Now at that time a violent attack was started against the church in Jerusalem ; and all but the Apostles went away into all parts of Judaea and Samaria .
And God-fearing men put Stephen's body in its last resting-place , making great weeping over him .
But Saul was burning with hate against the church , going into every house and taking men and women and putting them in prison .
But those who had gone in flight went everywhere preaching the word .
And Philip went down to Samaria and was teaching them about Christ .
And all the people gave attention to the words which Philip said , when they saw the signs which he did .
For unclean spirits came out from those who had them , crying with a loud voice ; and a number of those who were ill and broken in body were made well .
And there was much joy in that town .
But there was a certain man named Simon , who in the past had been a wonder-worker and a cause of surprise to the people of Samaria , saying that he himself was a great man :
To whom they all gave attention , from the smallest to the greatest , saying , This man is that power of God which is named Great .
And they gave attention to him , because for a long time his wonder-working powers had kept them under his control .
But when they had faith in the good news given by Philip about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ , a number of men and women had baptism .
And Simon himself had faith and , having had baptism , he went with Philip and , seeing the signs and the great wonders which he did , he was full of surprise .
Now when the Apostles at Jerusalem had news that the people of Samaria had taken the word of God into their hearts , they sent to them Peter and John ;
Who , when they came there , made prayer for them , that the Holy Spirit might be given to them :
For up to that time he had not come on any of them ; only baptism had been given to them in the name of the Lord Jesus .
Then they put their hands on them , and the Holy Spirit came on them .
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the touch of the Apostles' hands , he made them an offering of money , saying ,
Give me this power , so that when I put my hands on anyone he may get the Holy Spirit .
But Peter said , May your money come to destruction with you , because you had the idea that what is freely given by God may be got for a price .
You have no part in this business , because your heart is not right before God .
Let your heart be changed , and make prayer to God that you may have forgiveness for your evil thoughts .
For I see that you are prisoned in bitter envy and the chains of sin .
And Simon , answering , said , Make prayer for me to the Lord , so that these things which you have said may not come on me .
So they , having given their witness and made clear the word of the Lord , went back to Jerusalem , giving the good news on their way in a number of the small towns of Samaria .
But an angel of the Lord said to Philip , Get up , and go to the south , to the road which goes from Jerusalem to Gaza , through the waste land .
And he went and there was a man of Ethiopia , a servant of great authority under Candace , queen of the Ethiopians , and controller of all her property , who had come up to Jerusalem for worship ;
He was going back , seated in his carriage , and was reading the book of the prophet Isaiah .
And the Spirit said to Philip , Go near , and get on his carriage .
And Philip , running up to him , saw that he was reading Isaiah the prophet , and said to him , Is the sense of what you are reading clear to you ?
And he said , How is that possible when I have no guide ? And he made Philip get up by his side .
Now the place in the book where he was reading was this : He was taken , like a sheep , to be put to death ; and as a lamb is quiet when its wool is being cut , so he made no sound :
Being of low degree , his cause was not given a hearing : who has knowledge of his family ? for his life is cut off from the earth .
And the Ethiopian said to Philip , About whom are these words said by the prophet ? about himself , or some other ?
So Philip , starting from this writing , gave him the good news about Jesus .
And while they were going on their way , they came to some water , and the Ethiopian said , See , here is water ; why may I not have baptism ?
And he gave orders for the carriage to be stopped , and the two of them went down into the water , and Philip gave him baptism .
And when they came up out of the water , the Spirit of the Lord took Philip away ; and the Ethiopian saw him no more , for he went on his way full of joy .
But Philip came to Azotus , and went through all the towns , preaching the good news , till he came to Caesarea .
But Saul , still burning with desire to put to death the disciples of the Lord , went to the high priest ,
And made a request for letters from him to the Synagogues of Damascus , so that if there were any of the Way there , men or women , he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem .
And while he was journeying , he came near Damascus ; and suddenly he saw a light from heaven shining round him ;
And he went down on the earth , and a voice said to him , Saul , Saul , why are you attacking me so cruelly ?
And he said , Who are you , Lord ? And he said , I am Jesus , whom you are attacking :
But get up , and go into the town , and it will be made clear to you what you have to do .
And the men who were with him were not able to say anything ; hearing the voice , but seeing no one .
And Saul got up from the earth , and when his eyes were open , he saw nothing ; and he was guided by the hand into Damascus .
And for three days he was not able to see , and he took no food or drink .
Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus , named Ananias ; and the Lord said to him in a vision , Ananias ! and he said , Here I am , Lord .
And the Lord said to him , Get up , and go to the street which is named Straight , and make search at the house of Judas for one named Saul of Tarsus : for he is at prayer ;
And he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and putting his hands on him , so that he may be able to see .
But Ananias said , Lord , I have had accounts of this man from a number of people , how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem :
And here he has authority from the chief priests to make prisoners all who give worship to your name .
But the Lord said , Go without fear : for he is a special vessel for me , to give to the Gentiles and kings and to the children of Israel the knowledge of my name :
For I will make clear to him what troubles he will have to undergo for me .
And Ananias went out and came to the house , and putting his hands on him , said , Brother Saul , the Lord Jesus , whom you saw when you were on your journey , has sent me , so that you may be able to see , and be full of the Holy Spirit .
And straight away it seemed as if a veil was taken from his eyes , and he was able to see ; and he got up , and had baptism ;
And when he had taken food his strength came back . And for some days he kept with the disciples who were in Damascus .
And straight away , in the Synagogues , he was preaching Jesus as the Son of God .
And all those hearing him were full of wonder and said , Is not this the man who in Jerusalem was attacking all the worshippers of this name ? and he had come here so that he might take them as prisoners before the chief priests .
But Saul went on increasing in power , and the Jews in Damascus were not able to give answers to the arguments by which he made it clear that Jesus was the Christ .
Then , after some days , the Jews made an agreement together to put him to death :
But Saul got knowledge of their design . And they kept watch day and night on the roads out of the town , so that they might put him to death :
But his disciples took him by night and let him down from the wall in a basket .
And when he came to Jerusalem , he made an attempt to be joined to the disciples , but they were all in fear of him , not taking him for a disciple .
But Barnabas took him to the Apostles and gave them an account of how he had seen the Lord on the road , and had given hearing to his words , and how at Damascus he had been preaching in the name of Jesus without fear .
And he was with them , going in and out at Jerusalem ,
Preaching in the name of the Lord without fear ; and he had discussions with the Greek Jews ; but they were working for his death .
And when the brothers had knowledge of it , they took him to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus .
And so the church through all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace and was made strong ; and , living in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit , was increased greatly .
And it came about that while Peter was going through all parts of the country he came to the saints who were living at Lydda .
And there was a certain man there , named Aeneas , who for eight years had been in bed , without power of moving .
And Peter said to him , Aeneas , Jesus Christ makes you well : get up and make your bed . And straight away he got up .
And all those living in Lydda and Sharon saw him , and were turned to the Lord .
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha , that is , Dorcas : this woman was given to good works and acts of mercy at all times .
And it came about , in those days , that she got ill and came to her death : and when she had been washed , they put her in a room which was high up .
And because Lydda was near Joppa , the disciples , having knowledge that Peter was there , sent two men to him , requesting him to come to them straight away .
And Peter went with them . And when he had come , they took him into the room : and all the widows were there , weeping and putting before him the coats and clothing which Dorcas had made while she was with them .
But Peter made them all go outside , and went down on his knees in prayer ; and turning to the body , he said , Tabitha , get up . And , opening her eyes , she saw Peter and got up .
And he took her hand , lifting her up ; and , sending for the saints and widows , he gave her to them , living .
And news of it went all through Joppa , and a number of people had faith in the Lord .
And he was living in Joppa for some time with Simon , a leather-worker .
Now there was a certain man in Caesarea , named Cornelius , the captain of the Italian band of the army ;
A serious-minded man , fearing God with all his family ; he gave much money to the poor , and made prayer to God at all times .
He saw in a vision , clearly , at about the ninth hour of the day , an angel of the Lord coming to him and saying to him , Cornelius !
And he , looking on him in fear , said , What is it , Lord ? And he said to him , Your prayers and your offerings have come up to God , and he has kept them in mind .
Now send men to Joppa , and get one Simon , named Peter ,
Who is living with Simon , a leather-worker , whose house is by the sea .
And when the angel who said these words to him had gone away , he sent for two of his house-servants , and a God-fearing man of the army , one of those who were waiting on him at all times ;
And having given them an account of everything , he sent them to Joppa .
Now the day after , when they were on their journey and were near the town , Peter went up to the top of the house for prayer , about the sixth hour :
And he was in need of food : but while they were getting it ready , a deep sleep came on him ;
And he saw the heavens opening , and a vessel coming down , like a great cloth let down on the earth ,
In which were all sorts of beasts and birds .
And a voice came to him , saying , Come , Peter ; take them for food .
But Peter said , No , Lord ; for I have never taken food which is common or unclean .
And the voice came to him a second time , What God has made clean , do not you make common .
And this was done three times : and then the vessel was taken back into heaven .
Now while Peter was in doubt as to the purpose of this vision , the men who were sent by Cornelius , having made search for Simon's house , came to the door ,
To see if Simon , named Peter , was living there .
And , while Peter was turning the vision over in his mind , the Spirit said to him , See , three men are looking for you .
Go down , then , and go with them , doubting nothing , for I have sent them .
And Peter went down to the men , and said , I am the man you are looking for : why have you come ?
And they said , Cornelius , a captain , an upright and God-fearing man , respected by all the nation of the Jews , had word from God by an angel to send for you to his house , and to give hearing to your words .
So he took them in for the night . And the day after , he went with them , taking some of the brothers from Joppa with him .
And the day after that , they came to Caesarea . And Cornelius was waiting for them , having got together his relations and his near friends .
And when Peter came in , Cornelius came to him and , falling down at his feet , gave him worship .
But Peter , lifting him up , said , Get up , for I am a man as you are .
And saying these words , he went in , and saw that a great number of people had come together ;
And he said to them , You yourselves have knowledge that it is against the law for a man who is a Jew to be in the company of one who is of another nation ; but God has made it clear to me that no man may be named common or unclean :
And so I came without question , when I was sent for . What then is your purpose in sending for me ?
And Cornelius said , Four days from now I was in my house in prayer at the ninth hour ; and I saw before me a man in shining clothing ,
Who said , Cornelius , your prayer has come to the ears of God , and your offerings are kept in his memory .
Send , then , to Joppa , and get Simon , named Peter , to come to you ; he is living in the house of Simon , a leather-worker , by the sea .
So , straight away , I sent for you ; and you have done well to come . And now , we are all present before God , ready to give attention to all the things which the Lord has given you to say .
Then Peter said , Truly , I see clearly that God is no respecter of persons :
But in every nation , the man who has fear of him and does righteousness is pleasing to him .
The word which he sent to the children of Israel , giving the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (who is Lord of all)--
That word you yourselves have knowledge of , which was made public through all Judaea , starting from Galilee , after the baptism of which John was the preacher ,
About Jesus of Nazareth , how God gave the Holy Spirit to him , with power : and how he went about doing good and making well all who were troubled by evil spirits , for God was with him .
And we are witnesses of all the things which he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem ; whom they put to death , hanging him on a tree .
On the third day God gave him back to life , and let him be seen ,
Not by all the people , but by witnesses marked out before by God , even by us , who took food and drink with him after he came back from the dead .
And he gave us orders to give news of this to the people , and to give public witness that this is he whom God has made judge of the living and the dead .
To him all the prophets give witness , that through his name everyone who has faith in him will have forgiveness of sins .
While Peter was saying these words , the Holy Spirit came on all those who were hearing the word .
And the Jews of the faith , who had come with Peter , were full of wonder , because the Holy Spirit was given to the Gentiles ,
And they were talking in tongues , and giving glory to God . Then Peter said ,
Will any man say that these may not have baptism who have been given the Holy Spirit as we have ?
And he gave orders for them to have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ . Then they kept him with them for some days .
Now the Apostles and the brothers who were in Judaea had news that the word of God had been given to the Gentiles .
And when Peter came to Jerusalem , those who kept the rule of circumcision had an argument with him ,
Saying , You went to men without circumcision , and took food with them .
But Peter gave them an account of it all in order , saying to them ,
I was in the town of Joppa , at prayer : and falling into a deep sleep , I saw in a vision a vessel like a great cloth let down from heaven , and it came down to me :
And looking on it with attention I saw in it all sorts of beasts and birds .
And a voice came to my ears saying , Come , Peter ; take them for food .
But I said , No , Lord ; for nothing common or unclean has ever come into my mouth .
But the voice , coming a second time from heaven , said , What God has made clean , do not you make common .
And this was done three times , and they were all taken up again into heaven .
And at that minute , three men , sent from Caesarea , came to the house where we were .
And the Spirit gave me orders to go with them , doubting nothing . And these six brothers came with me ; and we went into that man's house :
And he gave us an account of how he had seen the angel in his house , saying , Send to Joppa , and get Simon , named Peter , to come to you ;
Who will say words to you through which you and all your family may get salvation .
And , while I was talking to them , the Holy Spirit came on them , as on us at first .
And the words of the Lord came into my mind , how he said , The baptism of John was with water , but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit .
If then God gave them , when they had faith in the Lord Jesus Christ , the same as he gave to us , who was I to go against God ?
And hearing these things they said nothing more , but gave glory to God , saying , Then to the Gentiles as to us has God given a change of heart , so that they may have life .
Then those who had gone away at the time of the trouble about Stephen , went as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus , preaching to the Jews only .
But some of them , men of Cyprus and Cyrene , when they came to Antioch , gave the good news about the Lord Jesus to the Greeks .
And the power of the Lord was with them , and a great number had faith and were turned to the Lord .
And news of them came to the ears of the church at Jerusalem : and they sent Barnabas as far as Antioch :
Who , when he came and saw the grace of God , was glad ; and he made clear to them the need of keeping near the Lord with all the strength of their hearts :
For he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith : and a great number were joined to the Lord .
Then he went on to Tarsus , looking for Saul ;
And when he had come across him , he took him to Antioch . And they were with the church there for a year , teaching the people ; and the disciples were first given the name of Christians in Antioch .
Now in those days prophets came from Jerusalem to Antioch .
And one of them , named Agabus , said publicly through the Spirit that there would be serious need of food all over the earth : which came about in the time of Claudius .
And the disciples , everyone as he was able , made a decision to send help to the brothers living in Judaea :
Which they did , sending it to the rulers of the church by the hand of Barnabas and Saul .
Now , about that time , Herod the king made cruel attacks on the Christians .
And he put James , the brother of John , to death with the sword .
And when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he went on to take Peter in addition . This was at the time of the feast of unleavened bread .
And having taken him , he put him in prison , with four bands of armed men to keep watch over him ; his purpose being to take him out to the people after the Passover .
So Peter was kept in prison : but the church made strong prayer to God for him .
And when Herod was about to take him out , the same night Peter was sleeping in chains between two armed men , and the watchmen were keeping watch before the door of the prison .
And a great light was seen shining in the room , and an angel of the Lord came to Peter and , touching him on his side so that he came out of his sleep , said , Get up quickly . And his chains came off his hands .
Then the angel said , Put on your shoes and get ready to go . And he did so . And he said , Put your coat round you and come with me .
And he went out after him ; and he was not certain if what was done by the angel was a fact , for it seemed to him that he was seeing a vision .
And when they had gone past the first and second watchmen they came to the iron door into the town , which came open by itself : and they went out and down one street ; and then the angel went away .
And when Peter came to his senses he said , Now , truly , I am certain that the Lord has sent his angel and taken me out of the hands of Herod , against all the hopes of the Jews .
And when he became clear about this , he went to the house of Mary , the mother of John named Mark , where a number of them had come together for prayer .
And he gave a blow on the door , and a young girl came to it , named Rhoda .
And hearing the voice of Peter , in her joy she went running , without opening the door , to say that Peter was outside .
And they said to her , You are off your head . But still she said , with decision , that it was so . And they said , It is his angel .
But Peter went on giving blows on the door : and when it was open and they saw him , they were full of wonder .
But he made a sign to them with his hand to be quiet , and gave them an account of how the Lord had taken him out of prison . And he said , Give the news to James and the brothers . And then he went away .
Now when it was day , the armed men were greatly troubled about what had become of Peter .
And Herod , when he sent for him , and he was not there , after questioning the watchmen , gave orders that they were to be put to death . Then he went down from Judaea to Caesarea for a time .
Now he was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon : and they came to him , all together , and having made friends with Blastus , the controller of the king's house , they made a request for peace , because their country was dependent on the king's country for its food .
And on the day which had been fixed , Herod , dressed in his robes and seated in his place , made a public statement to them .
And the people , with loud cries , said , It is the voice of a god , not of a man .
And straight away the angel of the Lord sent a disease on him , because he did not give the glory to God : and his flesh was wasted away by worms , and so he came to his end .
But the word of the Lord went on increasing .
And Barnabas and Saul came back from Jerusalem , when their work was ended , taking with them John named Mark .
Now there were at Antioch , in the church there , prophets and teachers , Barnabas , and Symeon who was named Niger , and Lucius of Cyrene , and Manaen , a relation of Herod the king , and Saul .
And while they were doing the Lord's work , and going without food , the Holy Spirit said , Let Barnabas and Saul be given to me for the special work for which they have been marked out by me .
Then , after prayer and going without food they put their hands on them , and sent them away .
So , being sent out by the Holy Spirit , they went down to Seleucia ; and from there they went by ship to Cyprus .
And at Salamis they were preaching the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews : and John was with them , helping them .
And when they had gone through all the island to Paphos , they came across a certain wonder-worker and false prophet , a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus ;
Who was with the ruler , Sergius Paulus , an able man . This man sent for Barnabas and Saul , desiring to have knowledge of the word of God .
But Elymas , the wonder-worker (for that is the sense of his name) , put himself against them , with the purpose of turning the ruler from the faith .
But Saul , whose other name is Paul , being full of the Holy Spirit , looking hard at him , said ,
O you , who are full of false tricks and evil ways , a son of the Evil One , hating all righteousness , will you for ever be turning people from the right ways of the Lord ?
And now , see , the hand of the Lord is on you , and you will be blind and not able to see the sun for a time . And straight away a dark mist came down on him ; and he went about looking for a guide .
Then the ruler , when he saw what was done , had faith , being full of wonder at the teaching of the Lord .
Then Paul and those who were with him went by ship from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia : and there John went away from them and came back to Jerusalem .
But they , going through from Perga , came to Antioch in Pisidia ; and they went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath and were seated .
And after the reading of the law and the prophets , the rulers of the Synagogue sent to them , saying , Brothers , if you have a word of comfort for the people , say on .
And Paul , getting up and making a sign with his hand , said , Men of Israel , and you who have the fear of God , give ear .
The God of this people Israel made selection of our fathers , lifting the people up from their low condition when they were living in the land of Egypt , and with a strong arm took them out of it .
And for about forty years he put up with their ways in the waste land .
And having put to destruction seven nations in the land of Canaan , he gave them the land for their heritage for about four hundred and fifty years .
And after these things he gave them judges , till the time of Samuel the prophet .
Then at their request for a king , God gave them Saul , the son of Kish , a man of the family of Benjamin , who was their king for forty years .
And having put him on one side , he made David their king , to whom he gave witness , saying , I have taken David , the son of Jesse , a man dear to my heart , who will do all my pleasure .
From this man's seed has God given to Israel a Saviour , even Jesus , as he gave his word ;
For whose coming John made ready the way by preaching to all the people of Israel the baptism which goes with a change of heart .
And when John was completing his work , he said , What do I seem to you to be ? I am not he ; but one is coming after me , whose shoes I am not good enough to undo .
My brothers , children of the family of Abraham , and those among you who have the fear of God , to us the word of this salvation is sent .
For the men of Jerusalem and their rulers , having no knowledge of him , or of the sayings of the prophets which come to their ears every Sabbath day , gave effect to them by judging him .
And though no cause of death was seen in him , they made a request to Pilate that he might be put to death .
And when they had done all the things said in the Writings about him , they took him down from the tree , and put him in the place of the dead .
But God gave him back from the dead :
And for a number of days he was seen by those who came with him from Galilee to Jerusalem , who are now his witnesses before the people .
And we are giving you the good news of the undertaking made to the fathers ,
Which God has now put into effect for our children , by sending Jesus ; as it says in the second Psalm , You are my Son ; this day I have given you being .
And about his coming back from the dead , never again to go to destruction , he has said these words , I will give you the holy and certain mercies of David .
Because he says in another Psalm , You will not let your Holy One see destruction .
Now David , having done God's work for his generation , went to sleep , and was put with his fathers , and his body came to destruction :
But he , who was lifted up by God , did not see destruction .
And so , let it be clear to you , my brothers , that through this man forgiveness of sins is offered to you :
And through him everyone who has faith is made free from all those things , from which the law of Moses was not able to make you free .
So take care that these words of the prophets do not come true for you ;
See , you doubters , have wonder and come to your end ; for I will do a thing in your days to which you will not give belief , even if it is made clear to you .
And when they went out , they made a request that these words might be said to them again on the Sabbath after .
Now when the meeting was ended , a number of the Jews and of the God-fearing Gentiles who had become Jews , went after Paul and Barnabas : who put before them how important it was to keep on in the grace of God .
And on the Sabbath after , almost all the town came together to give hearing to the word of God .
But when the Jews saw such a great number of people , they were full of envy and said evil words against Paul's preaching .
Then Paul and Barnabas without fear said , It was necessary for the word of God to be given to you first ; but because you will have nothing to do with it , and have no desire for eternal life , it will now be offered to the Gentiles .
For so the Lord has given us orders , saying , I have given you for a light to the Gentiles so that you may be for salvation to the ends of the earth .
And the Gentiles , hearing this , were glad and gave glory to the word of God : and those marked out by God for eternal life had faith .
And the word of the Lord went through all the country .
But the Jews , working up the feelings of the God-fearing women of high position and of the chief men of the town , got an attack started against Paul and Barnabas , driving them out of those parts .
But they , shaking off the dust of that place from their feet , came to Iconium .
And the disciples were full of joy and of the Holy Spirit .
Now in Iconium they went together to the Synagogue of the Jews and gave such teaching that a great number of Jews and Greeks had faith .
But those Jews who had not the faith , made the minds of the Gentiles bitter against the brothers .
So they kept there for a long time , taking heart in the Lord , who gave witness to the word of his grace by causing signs and wonders to be done by their hands .
But there was a division among the people of the town ; some were on the side of the Jews and some on the side of the Apostles .
And when a violent attempt was made by the Gentiles and the Jews , with their rulers , to make an attack on them and have them stoned ,
Having got news of it , they went in flight to the towns of Lycaonia , Lystra , and Derbe , and the country round about :
And went on preaching the good news there .
And at Lystra there was a certain man , who from birth had been without the use of his feet , never having had the power of walking .
This man was giving ear to the preaching of Paul , who , looking at him , and seeing that he had faith to be made well ,
Said in a loud voice , Get up on your feet . And , jumping up , he went walking about .
And when the people saw what Paul had done , they said in a loud voice , in the language of Lycaonia , The gods have come down to us in the form of men .
And they gave the name of Jupiter to Barnabas , and to Paul that of Mercury , because he was the chief talker .
And the priest of the image of Jupiter , which was before the town , took oxen and flowers to the doors of the town , and was about to make an offering with the people .
But when this came to the ears of the Apostles , Paul and Barnabas , they went running out among the people , parting their clothing , and crying out ,
Good people , why are you doing these things ? We are men with the same feelings as you , and we give you the good news so that you may be turned away from these foolish things to the living God , who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all things in them :
Who in the past let all nations go in the ways which seemed good to them .
But he was not without witness , because he did good , and gave you rain from heaven and times of fruit , making your hearts full of food and joy .
And even with these words , it was hard for them to keep the people from making an offering to them .
But some Jews came to that place from Antioch and Iconium , and got control over the people ; and after stoning Paul , they had him pulled out of the town , taking him for dead .
But when the disciples came round him , he got up and went into the town : and the day after he went away with Barnabas to Derbe .
And having made a number of disciples through the preaching of the good news in that town , they went back to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch ,
Making strong the souls of the disciples , saying to them that they were to keep the faith , and that we have to go through troubles of all sorts to come into the kingdom of God .
And when they had made selection of some to be rulers in every church , and had given themselves to prayer and kept themselves from food , they put them into the care of the Lord in whom they had faith .
And they went through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia .
And , after preaching the word in Perga , they went down to Attalia ;
And from there they went by ship to Antioch , where they had been handed over to the grace of God for the work which they had not done .
And when they came there , and had got the church together , they gave them an account of all the things which God had done through them , and how he had made open a door of faith to the Gentiles .
And they were with the disciples there for a long time .
Now certain men came down from Judaea , teaching the brothers and saying that without circumcision , after the rule of Moses , there is no salvation .
And after Paul and Barnabas had had no little argument and discussion with them , the brothers made a decision to send Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them to the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem about this question .
So they , being sent on their way by the church , went through Phoenicia and Samaria , giving news of the salvation of the Gentiles , to the great joy of all the brothers .
And when they came to Jerusalem , they had a meeting with the church and the Apostles and the rulers , and they gave an account of all the things which God had done through them .
But some of the Pharisees , who were of the faith , got up and said , It is necessary for these to have circumcision and to keep the law of Moses .
And the Apostles and the rulers of the church came together and gave thought to the question .
And when there had been much discussion , Peter got up and said to them , My brothers , you have knowledge that some time back it was God's pleasure that by my mouth the good news might be given to the Gentiles so that they might have faith .
And God , the searcher of hearts , was a witness to them , giving them the Holy Spirit even as he did to us ;
Making no division between them and us , but making clean their hearts by faith .
Why then are you testing God , by putting on the neck of the disciples a yoke so hard that not even our fathers or we were strong enough for it ?
But we have faith that we will get salvation through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way as they .
And all the people were quiet while Barnabas and Paul gave an account of the signs and wonders which God had done among the Gentiles by them .
And when they had come to an end , James , answering , said , My brothers , give ear to me :
Symeon has given an account of how God was first pleased to take from among the Gentiles a people for himself .
And this is in agreement with the words of the prophets , as it is said ,
After these things I will come back , and will put up the tent of David which has been broken down , building up again its broken parts and making it complete :
So that the rest of men may make search for the Lord , and all the Gentiles on whom my name is named ,
Says the Lord , who has made these things clear from the earliest times .
For this reason my decision is , that we do not put trouble in the way of those who from among the Gentiles are turned to God ;
But that we give them orders to keep themselves from things offered to false gods , and from the evil desires of the body , and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law , and from blood .
For Moses , from times long past , has his preachers in every town , reading his law in the Synagogues every Sabbath .
Then it seemed good to the Apostles and the rulers and all the church , to send men from among them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas ; Judas , named Barsabbas , and Silas , chief men among the brothers :
And they sent a letter by them , saying , The Apostles and the older brothers , to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia , may joy be with you :
Because we have knowledge that some who went from us have been troubling you with their words , putting your souls in doubt ; to whom we gave no such order ;
It seemed good to us , having come to an agreement together , to send these men to you , with our well loved Barnabas and Paul ,
Men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
And so we have sent Judas and Silas , who will say the same things to you themselves , by word of mouth .
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us , to put on you nothing more than these necessary things ;
To keep from things offered to false gods , and from blood , and from things put to death in ways which are against the law , and from the evil desires of the body ; if you keep yourselves from these , you will do well . May you be happy .
So they , being sent away , came down to Antioch , and having got the people together , they gave them the letter .
And after reading it , they were glad of its comfort .
And Judas and Silas , who themselves were prophets , gave teaching to the brothers and made them strong in the faith .
And when they had been there for some time , they were sent back in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them .
But Paul and Barnabas kept on in Antioch , teaching and preaching the word of God , with a number of others .
And after some days , Paul said to Barnabas , Let us go back and see the brothers in every town where we have given the word of God , and see how they are .
And Barnabas had a desire to take with them John , named Mark .
But Paul was of the opinion that it was not right to take with them one who had gone away from them in Pamphylia , and had not gone on with the work .
And there was a sharp argument between them , so that they were parted from one another , and Barnabas took Mark with him and went by ship to Cyprus ;
But Paul took Silas and went away with the blessing of the brothers .
And he went through Syria and Cilicia , making the churches stronger in the faith .
And he came to Derbe and Lystra : and there was a certain disciple there named Timothy , whose mother was one of the Jews of the faith , but his father was a Greek ;
Of whom the brothers at Lystra and Iconium had a high opinion .
Paul had a desire for him to go with him , and he gave him circumcision because of the Jews who were in those parts : for they all had knowledge that his father was a Greek .
And on their way through the towns , they gave them the rules which had been made by the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem , so that they might keep them .
So the churches were made strong in the faith and were increased in number every day .
And after they had gone through the land of Phrygia and Galatia , the Holy Spirit did not let them take the word into Asia ;
And having come to Mysia , they made an attempt to go into Bithynia , but the Spirit of Jesus did not let them ;
And going past Mysia , they came down to Troas .
And Paul had a vision in the night ; a man of Macedonia came , requesting him , and saying , Come over into Macedonia and give us help .
And when he had seen the vision , straight away we made the decision to go into Macedonia , for it seemed certain to us that God had sent us to give the good news to them .
So , from Troas we went straight by ship to Samothrace and the day after to Neapolis ;
And from there to Philippi , which is the most important town of Macedonia and a Roman colony : and we were there for some days .
And on the Sabbath we went outside the town , by the river , where we had an idea that there would be a place of prayer ; and , being seated , we had talk with the women who had come together .
And a certain woman named Lydia , a trader in purple cloth of the town of Thyatira , and a God-fearing woman , gave ear to us : whose heart the Lord made open to give attention to the things which Paul was saying .
And when she and her family had had baptism , she made a request to us , saying , If it seems to you that I am true to the Lord , come into my house and be my guests . And she made us come .
And when we were going to the place of prayer , we came across a girl with a spirit which gave knowledge of the future , whose masters made great profit from her power .
She came after Paul and us , crying out and saying , These men are the servants of the Most High God , who are giving you news of the way of salvation .
And this she did on a number of days . But Paul was greatly troubled and , turning , said to the spirit , I give you orders in the name of Jesus Christ , to come out of her . And it came out that very hour .
But when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone , they took Paul and Silas , pulling them into the market-place before the rulers ;
And when they had taken them before the authorities , they said , These men , who are Jews , are greatly troubling our town ;
Teaching rules of living which it is not right for us to have or to keep , being Romans .
And the people made an attack on them all together : and the authorities took their clothing off them , and gave orders for them to be whipped .
And when they had given them a great number of blows , they put them in prison , giving orders to the keeper of the prison to keep them safely :
And he , having such orders , put them into the inner prison with chains on their feet .
But about the middle of the night , Paul and Silas were making prayers and songs to God in the hearing of the prisoners ;
And suddenly there was an earth-shock , so that the base of the prison was moved : and all the doors came open , and everyone's chains came off .
And the keeper , coming out of his sleep , and seeing the prison doors open , took his sword and was about to put himself to death , fearing that the prisoners had got away .
But Paul said in a loud voice , Do yourself no damage , for we are all here .
And he sent for lights and came rushing in and , shaking with fear , went down on his face before Paul and Silas ,
And took them out and said , Sirs , what have I to do to get salvation ?
And they said , Have faith in the Lord Jesus , and you and your family will have salvation .
And they gave the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house .
And that same hour of the night , he took them , and when he had given attention to their wounds , he and all his family had baptism straight away .
And he took them into his house and gave them food , and he was full of joy , having faith in God with all his family .
But when it was day , the authorities sent the police , saying , Let these men go .
And the keeper said to Paul , The authorities have given orders to let you go : come out now , and go in peace .
But Paul said to them , They have given us who are Romans a public whipping without judging us , and have put us in prison . Will they now send us out secretly ? no , truly , let them come themselves and take us out .
And the police gave an account of these words to the authorities , and they were full of fear on hearing that they were Romans ;
Then they came and made prayers to them , requesting them , when they had taken them out , to go away from the town .
And they came out of the prison and went to the house of Lydia : and when they had seen the brothers they gave them comfort and went away .
Now when they had gone through Amphipolis and Apollonia they came to Thessalonica , where there was a Synagogue of the Jews :
And Paul , as he generally did , went in to them , and on three Sabbath days had discussions with them from the holy Writings ,
Saying to them clearly and openly that Christ had to be put to death and come back to life again ; and that this Jesus , whom , he said , I am preaching to you , is the Christ .
And some of them had faith , and were joined to Paul and Silas ; and a number of the God-fearing Greeks , and some of the chief women .
But the Jews , being moved with envy , took with them certain low persons from among the common people , and getting together a great number of people , made an outcry in the town , attacking the house of Jason with the purpose of taking them out to the people .
And when they were not able to get them , they took Jason and some of the brothers by force before the rulers of the town , crying , These men , who have made trouble all over the world have now come here ;
Whom Jason has taken into his house : and they are acting against the orders of Caesar , saying that there is another king , Jesus .
And hearing these things the people and the rulers of the town were troubled .
And having made Jason and the others give an undertaking to keep the peace , they let them go .
And the brothers straight away sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea : and they , when they came there , went to the Synagogue of the Jews .
Now these were more noble than the Jews of Thessalonica , for they gave serious attention to the word , searching in the holy Writings every day , to see if these things were so .
And a number of them had faith , and no small number of the Greek women of high position and of the men .
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had news that Paul was preaching the word at Beroea , they came there , troubling the people and working them up .
So the brothers sent Paul straight away to the sea : but Silas and Timothy kept there still .
But those who went with Paul took him as far as Athens , and then went away , with orders from him to Silas and Timothy to come to him quickly .
Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens , his spirit was troubled , for he saw all the town full of images of the gods .
So he had discussions in the Synagogue with the Jews and God-fearing Gentiles , and every day in the market-place with those who were there .
And some of those who were supporters of the theories of the Epicureans and the Stoics , had a meeting with him . And some said , What is this talker of foolish words saying ? And others , He seems to be a preacher of strange gods : because he was preaching of Jesus and his coming back from the dead .
And they took him to Mars' Hill , saying , Will you make clear to us what is this new teaching of yours ?
For you seem to us to say strange things , and we have a desire to get the sense of them .
(Now all the Athenians and the men from other lands who come there were giving all their time to talking or hearing of anything new .)
And Paul got to his feet on Mars' Hill and said , O men of Athens , I see that you are overmuch given to fear of the gods .
For when I came by , I was looking at the things to which you give worship , and I saw an altar with this writing on it , TO THE GOD OF WHOM THERE IS NO KNOWLEDGE . Now , what you , without knowledge , give worship to , I make clear to you .
The God who made the earth and everything in it , he , being Lord of heaven and earth , is not housed in buildings made with hands ;
And he is not dependent on the work of men's hands , as if he had need of anything , for he himself gives to all life and breath and all things ;
And he has made of one blood all the nations of men living on all the face of the earth , ordering their times and the limits of their lands ,
So that they might make search for God , in order , if possible , to get knowledge of him and make discovery of him , though he is not far from every one of us :
For in him we have life and motion and existence ; as certain of your verse writers have said , For we are his offspring .
If then we are the offspring of God , it is not right for us to have the idea that God is like gold or silver or stone , formed by the art or design of man .
Those times when men had no knowledge were overlooked by God ; but now he gives orders to all men in every place to undergo a change of heart :
Because a day has been fixed in which all the world will be judged in righteousness by the man who has been marked out by him for this work ; of which he has given a sign to all men by giving him back from the dead .
Now on hearing about the coming back from death , some of them made sport of it , but others said , Let us go more fully into this another time .
And so Paul went away from among them .
But some men gave him their support : among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite , and a woman named Damaris , and others with them .
After these things , he went away from Athens , and came to Corinth .
And there he came across a certain Jew named Aquila , a man of Pontus by birth , who not long before had come from Italy with his wife Priscilla , because Claudius had given orders that all Jews were to go away from Rome : and he came to them ;
And because he was of the same trade , he was living with them , and they did their work together ; for by trade they were tent-makers .
And every Sabbath he had discussions in the Synagogue , turning Jews and Greeks to the faith .
And when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia , Paul was completely given up to the word , preaching to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus .
And when they put themselves against him , and said evil words , he said , shaking his clothing , Your blood be on your heads , I am clean : from now I will go to the Gentiles .
And moving from there , he went into the house of a man named Titus Justus , a God-fearing man , whose house was very near the Synagogue .
And Crispus , the ruler of the Synagogue , with all his family , had faith in the Lord ; and a great number of the people of Corinth , hearing the word , had faith and were given baptism .
And the Lord said to Paul in the night , in a vision , Have no fear and go on preaching :
For I am with you , and no one will make an attack on you to do you damage : for I have a number of people in this town .
And he was there for a year and six months , teaching the word of God among them .
But when Gallio was ruler of Achaia , all the Jews together made an attack on Paul , and took him to the judge's seat ,
Saying , This man is teaching the people to give worship to God in a way which is against the law .
But when Paul was about to say something , Gallio said to the Jews , If this was anything to do with wrongdoing or crime , there would be a reason for me to give you a hearing :
But if it is a question of words or names or of your law , see to it yourselves ; I will not be a judge of such things .
And he sent them away from the judge's seat .
And they all made an attack on Sosthenes , the ruler of the Synagogue , and gave him blows before the judge's seat ; but Gallio gave no attention to these things .
And Paul , after waiting some days , went away from the brothers and went by ship to Syria , Priscilla and Aquila being with him ; and he had had his hair cut off in Cenchrea , for he had taken an oath .
And they came down to Ephesus and he left them there : and he himself went into the Synagogue and had a discussion with the Jews .
And being requested by them to be there for a longer time , he said , No ;
And went from them , saying , I will come back to you if God lets me ; and he took ship from Ephesus .
And when he had come to land at Caesarea , he went to see the church , and then went down to Antioch .
And having been there for some time , he went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order , making the disciples strong in the faith .
Now a certain Jew named Apollos , an Alexandrian by birth , and a man of learning , came to Ephesus ; and he had great knowledge of the holy Writings .
This man had been trained in the way of the Lord ; and burning in spirit , he gave himself up to teaching the facts about Jesus , though he had knowledge only of John's baptism :
And he was preaching in the Synagogue without fear . But Priscilla and Aquila , hearing his words , took him in , and gave him fuller teaching about the way of God .
And when he had a desire to go over into Achaia , the brothers gave him help , and sent letters to the disciples requesting them to take him in among them : and when he had come , he gave much help to those who had faith through grace :
For he overcame the Jews in public discussion , making clear from the holy Writings that the Christ was Jesus .
And it came about that while Apollos was at Corinth , Paul , having gone through the higher country , came to Ephesus , where there were certain disciples :
And he said to them , Did you get the Holy Spirit when you had faith ? And they said to him , No , we have had no knowledge of the Holy Spirit .
And he said , What sort of baptism did you have ? And they said , The baptism of John .
And Paul said , John gave a baptism which goes with a change of heart , saying to the people that they were to have faith in him who was coming after him , that is , in Jesus .
And hearing this , they had baptism in the name of the Lord Jesus .
And when Paul had put his hands on them , the Holy Spirit came on them ; and they had the power of talking in tongues , and acting like prophets .
And there were about twelve of these men .
And he went into the Synagogue , and for three months he was preaching there without fear , reasoning and teaching about the kingdom of God .
But because some of the people were hard-hearted and would not give hearing , saying evil words about the Way before the people , he went away from them , and kept the disciples separate , reasoning every day in the school of Tyrannus .
And this went on for two years , so that all those who were living in Asia had knowledge of the word of the Lord , Greeks as well as Jews .
And God did special works of power by the hands of Paul :
So that bits of linen and clothing from his body were taken to people who were ill , and their diseases went away from them and the evil spirits went out .
But some of the Jews who went from place to place driving out evil spirits , took it on themselves to make use of the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits , saying , I give you orders , by Jesus , whom Paul is preaching .
And there were seven sons of a man named Sceva , a Jew and a chief priest , who did this .
And the evil spirit , answering , said to them , I have knowledge of Jesus , and of Paul , but who are you ?
And the man in whom the evil spirit was , jumping on them , was stronger than the two of them , and overcame them , so that they went running from that house , wounded and without their clothing .
And this came to the ears of all those , Jews and Greeks , who were living at Ephesus ; and fear came on them all , and the name of the Lord Jesus was made great .
And a number of those who had faith came and made a public statement of their sins and all their acts .
And a great number of those who were experts in strange arts took their books and put them on the fire in front of everyone : and when the books were valued they came to fifty thousand bits of silver .
So the word of the Lord was increased very greatly and was full of power .
Now after these things were ended , Paul came to a decision that when he had gone through Macedonia and Achaia he would go to Jerusalem , saying , After I have been there , I have a desire to see Rome .
And having sent two of his helpers , Timothy and Erastus , into Macedonia , he himself went on living in Asia for a time .
And about that time a great outcry took place about the Way .
For there was a certain man named Demetrius , a silver-worker , who made silver boxes for the images of Diana , and gave no small profit to the workmen ;
Whom he got together , with other workmen of the same trade , and said to them , Men , it is clear that from this business we get our wealth .
And you see , for it has come to your ears , that not only at Ephesus , but almost all through Asia , this Paul has been teaching numbers of people and turning them away , saying that those are not gods who are made by men's hands :
And there is danger , not only that our trade may be damaged in the opinion of men , but that the holy place of the great goddess Diana may be no longer honoured , and that she to whom all Asia and the world give worship , will be put down from her high position .
And hearing this , they were very angry , crying out and saying , Great is Diana of Ephesus .
And the town was full of noise and trouble , and they all came running into the theatre , having taken by force Gaius and Aristarchus , men of Macedonia who were journeying in company with Paul .
And when Paul was about to go in to the people , the disciples did not let him .
And some of the rulers of Asia , being his friends , sent to him , requesting him seriously not to put himself in danger by going into the theatre .
And some said one thing , and some another : for there was no order in the meeting ; and most of them had no idea why they had come together .
Then they took Alexander out from among the people , the Jews putting him forward . And Alexander , making a sign with his hand , was about to make a statement to the people in answer :
But when they saw that he was a Jew , all of them with one voice went on crying out for about two hours , Great is Diana of Ephesus .
And when the chief secretary had got the people quiet , he said , Men of Ephesus , is any man without knowledge that the town of Ephesus is the keeper of the holy place of the great Diana , who was sent down from Jupiter ?
So then , because these things may not be doubted , it would be better for you to be quiet , and do nothing unwise .
For you have taken these men , who are not doing damage to the holy place or talking against our goddess .
If , then , Demetrius and the workmen who are with him have a protest to make against any man , the law is open to them , and there are judges ; let them put up a cause at law against one another .
But if any other business is in question , let it be taken up in the regular meeting .
For , truly , we are in danger of being made responsible for this day's trouble , there being no cause for it : and we are not able to give any reason for this coming together .
And when he had said this , he sent the meeting away .
And after the noise had come to an end , Paul , having sent for the disciples and given them comfort , went away from them to Macedonia .
And when he had gone through those parts and given them much teaching , he came into Greece .
And when he had been there three months , because the Jews had made a secret design against him when he was about to take ship for Syria , he made a decision to go back through Macedonia .
And Sopater of Beroea , the son of Pyrrhus , and Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica , and Gaius of Derbe , and Timothy , and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia , went with him as far as Asia .
But these had gone before , and were waiting for us at Troas .
And we went away from Philippi by ship after the days of unleavened bread , and came to them at Troas in five days ; and we were there for seven days .
And on the first day of the week , when we had come together for the holy meal , Paul gave them a talk , for it was his purpose to go away on the day after ; and he went on talking till after the middle of the night .
And there were a number of lights in the room where we had come together .
And a certain young man named Eutychus , who was seated in the window , went into a deep sleep ; and while Paul went on talking , being overcome by sleep , he had a fall from the third floor , and was taken up dead .
And Paul went down and , falling on him , took him in his arms and said , Do not be troubled , for his life is in him .
And when he had gone up , and had taken the broken bread , he went on talking to them for a long time , even till dawn , and then he went away .
And they took the boy in , living , and were greatly comforted .
But we , going before him by ship , went to Assos with the purpose of taking Paul in there : for so he had given orders , because he himself was coming by land .
And when he came up with us at Assos , we took him in the ship and went on to Mitylene .
And going from there by sea , we came on the day after opposite Chios , and touching at Samos on the day after that , we came on the third day to Miletus .
For Paul's purpose was to go past Ephesus , so that he might not be kept in Asia ; for he was going quickly , in order , if possible , to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost .
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus for the rulers of the church .
And when they had come , he said to them , You yourselves have seen what my life has been like all the time from the day when I first came into Asia ,
Doing the Lord's work without pride , through all the sorrow and troubles which came on me because of the evil designs of the Jews :
And how I kept back nothing which might be of profit to you , teaching you publicly and privately ,
Preaching to Jews and to Greeks the need for a turning of the heart to God , and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ .
And now , as you see , I am going to Jerusalem , a prisoner in spirit , having no knowledge of what will come to me there :
Only that the Holy Spirit makes clear to me in every town that prison and pains are waiting for me .
But I put no value on my life , if only at the end of it I may see the work complete which was given to me by the Lord Jesus , to be a witness of the good news of the grace of God .
And now I am conscious that you , among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom , will not see my face again .
And so I say to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men .
For I have not kept back from you anything of the purpose of God .
Give attention to yourselves , and to all the flock which the Holy Spirit has given into your care , to give food to the church of God , for which he gave his blood .
I am conscious that after I am gone , evil wolves will come in among you , doing damage to the flock ;
And from among yourselves will come men who will give wrong teaching , turning away the disciples after them .
So keep watch , having in mind that for three years without resting I was teaching every one of you , day and night , with weeping .
And now , I give you into the care of God and the word of his grace , which is able to make you strong and to give you your heritage among all the saints .
I have had no desire for any man's silver or gold or clothing .
You yourselves have seen that with these hands I got what was necessary for me and those who were with me .
In all things I was an example to you of how , in your lives , you are to give help to the feeble , and keep in memory the words of the Lord Jesus , how he himself said , There is a greater blessing in giving than in getting .
And having said these words , he went down on his knees in prayer with them all .
And they were all weeping , falling on Paul's neck and kissing him ,
Being sad most of all because he had said that they would not see his face again . And so they went with him to the ship .
And after parting from them , we put out to sea and came straight to Cos , and the day after to Rhodes , and from there to Patara :
And as there was a ship going to Phoenicia , we went in it .
And when we had come in view of Cyprus , going past it on our left , we went on to Syria , and came to land at Tyre : for there the goods which were in the ship had to be taken out .
And meeting the disciples we were there for seven days : and they gave Paul orders through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem .
And when these days came to an end , we went on our journey ; and they all , with their wives and children , came with us on our way till we were out of the town : and after going on our knees in prayer by the sea ,
We said our last words to one another , and got into the ship , and they went back to their houses .
And journeying by ship from Tyre we came to Ptolemais ; and there we had talk with the brothers and were with them for one day .
And on the day after , we went away and came to Caesarea , where we were guests in the house of Philip , the preacher , who was one of the seven .
And he had four daughters , virgins , who were prophets .
And while we were waiting there for some days , a certain prophet , named Agabus , came down from Judaea .
And he came to us , and took the band of Paul's clothing , and putting it round his feet and hands , said , The Holy Spirit says these words , So will the Jews do to the man who is the owner of this band , and they will give him up into the hands of the Gentiles .
And hearing these things , we and those who were living in that place made request to him not to go to Jerusalem .
Then Paul said , What are you doing , weeping and wounding my heart ? for I am ready , not only to be a prisoner , but to be put to death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus .
And as he might not be moved we did no more , saying , Let the purpose of God be done .
And after these days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem .
And some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us , taking a certain Mnason of Cyprus , one of the early disciples , in whose house we were to be living .
And when we came to Jerusalem , the brothers were pleased to see us .
And on the day after , Paul went with us to James , and all the rulers of the church were present .
And when he had said how glad he was to see them , he gave them a detailed account of the things which God had done through his work among the Gentiles .
And hearing it , they gave praise to God ; and they said to him , You see , brother , what thousands there are among the Jews , who have the faith ; and they all have a great respect for the law :
And they have had news of you , how you have been teaching all the Jews among the Gentiles to give up the law of Moses , and not to give circumcision to their children , and not to keep the old rules .
What then is the position ? They will certainly get news that you have come .
Do this , then , which we say to you : We have four men who have taken an oath ;
Go with these , and make yourself clean with them , and make the necessary payments for them , so that they may be free from their oath : and everyone will see that the statements made about you are not true , but that you put yourself under rule , and keep the law .
But as to the Gentiles who have the faith , we sent a letter , giving our decision that they were to keep themselves from offerings made to false gods , and from blood , and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law , and from the evil desires of the body .
Then Paul took the men , and on the day after , making himself clean with them , he went into the Temple , giving out the statement that the days necessary for making them clean were complete , till the offering was made for every one of them .
And when the seven days were almost ended , the Jews from Asia , seeing him in the Temple , got the people together and put their hands on him ,
Crying out , Men of Israel , come to our help ! this is the man who is teaching all men everywhere against the people and the law and this place : and in addition , he has taken Greeks into the Temple , and made this holy place unclean .
For they had seen him before in the town with Trophimus of Ephesus , and had the idea that Paul had taken him with him into the Temple .
And all the town was moved , and the people came running together and put their hands on Paul , pulling him out of the Temple : and then the doors were shut .
And while they were attempting to put him to death , news came to the chief captain of the band that all Jerusalem was out of control .
And straight away he took some armed men and went quickly down to them : and the Jews , seeing them , gave no more blows to Paul .
Then the chief captain came near and took him , and gave orders for him to be put in chains , questioning them as to who he was and what he had done ?
And some said one thing and some another , among the people : and as he was not able to get a knowledge of the facts because of the noise , he gave orders for Paul to be taken into the army building .
And when he came on to the steps , he was lifted up by the armed men , because of the force of the people ;
For a great mass of people came after them , crying out , Away with him !
And when Paul was about to be taken into the building , he said to the chief captain , May I say something to you ? And he said , Have you a knowledge of Greek ?
Are you by chance the Egyptian who , before this , got the people worked up against the government and took four thousand men of the Assassins out into the waste land ?
But Paul said , I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia , which is not an unimportant town : I make a request to you to let me say a word to the people .
And when he let him do so , Paul , from the steps , made a sign with his hand to the people , and when they were all quiet , he said to them in the Hebrew language ,
My brothers and fathers , give ear to the story of my life which I now put before you .
And , hearing him talking in the Hebrew language , they became the more quiet , and he said ,
I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia by birth , but I had my education in this town at the feet of Gamaliel , being trained in the keeping of every detail of the law of our fathers ; given up to the cause of God with all my heart , as you are today .
And I made attacks on this Way , even to death , taking men and women and putting them in prison .
Of which the high priest will be a witness , and all the rulers , from whom I had letters to the brothers ; and I went into Damascus , to take those who were there as prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment .
And it came about that while I was on my journey , coming near to Damascus , about the middle of the day , suddenly I saw a great light from heaven shining round me .
And when I went down on the earth , a voice came to my ears saying to me , Saul , Saul , why are you attacking me so cruelly ?
And I , answering , said , Who are you ; Lord ? And he said to me , I am Jesus of Nazareth , whom you are attacking .
And those who were with me saw the light , but the voice of him who was talking to me came not to their ears .
And I said , What have I to do , Lord ? And the Lord said to me , Get up , and go into Damascus ; and it will be made clear to you what you have to do .
And because I was unable to see because of the glory of that light , those who were with me took me by the hand , and so I came to Damascus .
And one Ananias , a God-fearing man , who kept the law , and of whom all the Jews in that place had a high opinion ,
Came to my side and said , Brother Saul , let your eyes be open . And in that very hour I was able to see him .
And he said , You have been marked out by the God of our fathers to have knowledge of his purpose , and to see the Upright One and to give ear to the words of his mouth .
For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and of what has come to your ears .
And now , why are you waiting ? get up , and have baptism , for the washing away of your sins , giving worship to his name .
And it came about that when I had come back to Jerusalem , while I was at prayer in the Temple , my senses became more than naturally clear ,
And I saw him saying to me , Go out of Jerusalem straight away because they will not give hearing to your witness about me .
And I said , Lord , they themselves have knowledge that I went through the Synagogues putting in prison and whipping all those who had faith in you :
And when Stephen your witness was put to death , I was there , giving approval , and looking after the clothing of those who put him to death .
And he said to me , Go , for I will send you far away to the Gentiles .
And they gave him a hearing as far as this word ; then with loud voices they said , Away with this man from the earth ; it is not right for him to be living .
And while they were crying out , and pulling off their clothing , and sending dust into the air ,
The chief captain gave orders for him to be taken into the army building , saying that he would put him to the test by whipping , so that he might have knowledge of the reason why they were crying out so violently against him .
And when they had put leather bands round him , Paul said to the captain who was present , Is it the law for you to give blows to a man who is a Roman and has not been judged ?
And hearing this , the man went to the chief captain and gave him an account of it , saying , What are you about to do ? for this man is a Roman .
And the chief captain came to him and said , Give me an answer , are you a Roman ? And he said , Yes .
And the chief captain said , I got Roman rights for myself at a great price . And Paul said , But I had them by birth .
Then those who were about to put him to the test went away : and the chief captain was in fear , seeing that he was a Roman , and that he had put chains on him .
But on the day after , desiring to have certain knowledge of what the Jews had to say against him , he made him free , and gave orders for the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to come together , and he took Paul and put him before them .
And Paul , looking fixedly at the Sanhedrin , said , My brothers , my life has been upright before God till this day .
And the high priest , Ananias , gave orders to those who were near him to give him a blow on the mouth .
Then Paul said to him , God will give blows to you , you whitewashed wall : are you here to be my judge by law , and by your orders am I given blows against the law ?
And those who were near said , Do you say such words against God's high priest ?
And Paul said , Brother , I had no idea that he was the high priest : for it has been said , You may not say evil about the ruler of your people .
But when Paul saw that half of them were Sadducees and the rest Pharisees , he said in the Sanhedrin , Brothers , I am a Pharisee , and the son of Pharisees : I am here to be judged on the question of the hope of the coming back from the dead .
And when he had said this , there was an argument between the Pharisees and the Sadducees , and a division in the meeting .
For the Sadducees say that there is no coming back from the dead , and no angels or spirits : but the Pharisees have belief in all these .
And there was a great outcry : and some of the scribes on the side of the Pharisees got up and took part in the discussion , saying , We see no evil in this man : what if he has had a revelation from an angel or a spirit ?
And when the argument became very violent , the chief captain , fearing that Paul would be pulled in two by them , gave orders to the armed men to take him by force from among them , and take him into the army building .
And the night after , the Lord came to his side and said , Be of good heart , for as you have been witnessing for me in Jerusalem , so will you be my witness in Rome .
And when it was day , the Jews came together and put themselves under an oath that they would take no food or drink till they had put Paul to death .
And more than forty of them took this oath .
And they came to the chief priests and the rulers and said , We have taken a great oath to take no food till we have put Paul to death .
So now , will you and the Sanhedrin make a request to the military authorities to have him sent down to you , as if you were desiring to go into the business in greater detail ; and we , before ever he gets to you , will be waiting to put him to death .
But Paul's sister's son had word of their design , and he came into the army building and gave news of it to Paul .
And Paul sent for a captain and said , Take this young man to your chief , for he has news for him .
So he took him to the chief captain and said , Paul , the prisoner , made a request to me to take this young man to you , for he has something to say to you .
And the chief took him by the hand and , going on one side , said to him privately , What is it you have to say to me ?
And he said , The Jews are in agreement together to make a request to you for Paul to be taken , on the day after this , into the Sanhedrin , to be questioned in greater detail .
But do not give way to them , for more than forty of them are waiting for him , having taken an oath not to take food or drink till they have put him to death : and now they are ready , waiting for your order .
So the chief captain let the young man go , saying to him , Do not say to anyone that you have given me word of these things .
And he sent for two captains and said , Make ready two hundred men , with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen , to go to Caesarea , at the third hour of the night :
And get beasts so that they may put Paul on them , and take him safely to Felix , the ruler .
And he sent a letter in these words :
Claudius Lysias , to the most noble ruler , Felix , peace be with you .
This man was taken by the Jews , and was about to be put to death by them , when I came on them with the army and took him out of danger , having knowledge that he was a Roman .
And , desiring to get at the reason for their attack on him , I took him down to their Sanhedrin :
Then it became clear to me that it was a question of their law , and that nothing was said against him which might be a reason for prison or death .
And when news was given to me that a secret design was being made against the man , I sent him straight away to you , giving orders to those who are against him to make their statements before you .
So the armed men , as they were ordered , took Paul and came by night to Antipatris .
But on the day after , they sent the horsemen on with him , and went back to their place :
And they , when they came to Caesarea , gave the letter to the ruler , and took Paul before him .
And after reading it , he said , What part of the country do you come from ? And , hearing that he was from Cilicia ,
I will give hearing to your cause , he said , when those who are against you have come . And he gave orders for him to be kept in Herod's Praetorium .
And after five days , the high priest , Ananias , came with certain of the rulers , and an expert talker , one Tertullus ; and they made a statement to Felix against Paul .
And when he had been sent for , Tertullus , starting his statement , said , Because by you we are living in peace , and through your wisdom wrongs are put right for this nation ,
In all things and in all places we are conscious of our great debt to you , most noble Felix .
But , so that I may not make you tired , I make a request to you of your mercy , to give hearing to a short statement .
For this man , in our opinion , is a cause of trouble , a maker of attacks on the government among Jews through all the empire , and a chief mover in the society of the Nazarenes :
Who , in addition , was attempting to make the Temple unclean : whom we took ,
And from whom you will be able , by questioning him yourself , to get knowledge of all the things which we say against him .
And the Jews were in agreement with his statement , saying that these things were so .
Then when the ruler had given him a sign to make his answer , Paul said , Because I have knowledge that you have been a judge over this nation for a number of years , I am glad to make my answer :
Seeing that you are able to make certain of the fact that it is not more than twelve days from the time when I came up to Jerusalem for worship ;
And they have not seen me in argument with any man in the Temple , or working up the feelings of the people , in the Synagogues or in the town :
And they are not able to give facts in support of the things which they say against me now .
But this I will say openly to you , that I do give worship to the God of our fathers after that Way , which to them is not the true religion : but I have belief in all the things which are in the law and in the books of the prophets :
Hoping in God for that which they themselves are looking for , that there will be a coming back from the dead for upright men and wrongdoers .
And in this , I do my best at all times to have no reason for shame before God or men .
Now after a number of years I came to give help and offerings to my nation :
And having been made clean , I was in the Temple , but not with a great number of people , and not with noise : but there were certain Jews from Asia ,
And it would have been better if they had come here to make a statement , if they have anything against me .
Or let these men here present say what wrongdoing was seen in me when I was before the Sanhedrin ,
But only this one thing which I said among them in a loud voice , I am this day being judged on the question of the coming back from the dead .
But Felix , who had a more detailed knowledge of the Way , put them off , saying , When Lysias , the chief captain , comes down , I will give attention to your business .
And he gave orders to the captain to keep Paul under his control , and to let him have everything he had need of ; and not to keep his friends from coming to see him .
But after some days , Felix came with Drusilla his wife , who was of the Jews by birth , and sent for Paul , and gave hearing to him about faith in Christ Jesus .
And while he was talking about righteousness and self-control and the judging which was to come , Felix had great fear and said , Go away for the present , and when the right time comes I will send for you .
For he was hoping that Paul would give him money : so he sent for him more frequently and had talk with him .
But after two years Porcius Festus took the place of Felix , who , desiring to have the approval of the Jews , kept Paul in chains .
So Festus , having come into that part of the country which was under his rule , after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea .
And the chief priests and the chief men of the Jews made statements against Paul ,
Requesting Festus to give effect to their design against him , and send him to Jerusalem , when they would be waiting to put him to death on the way .
But Festus , in answer , said that Paul was being kept in prison at Caesarea , and that in a short time he himself was going there .
So , he said , let those who have authority among you go with me , and if there is any wrong in the man , let them make a statement against him .
And when he had been with them not more than eight or ten days , he went down to Caesarea ; and on the day after , he took his place on the judge's seat , and sent for Paul .
And when he came , the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem came round him , and made all sorts of serious statements against him , which were not supported by the facts .
Then Paul , in his answer to them , said , I have done no wrong against the law of the Jews , or against the Temple , or against Caesar .
But Festus , desiring to get the approval of the Jews , said to Paul , Will you go up to Jerusalem , and be judged before me there in connection with these things ?
And Paul said , I am before the seat of Caesar's authority where it is right for me to be judged : I have done no wrong to the Jews , as you are well able to see .
If , then , I am a wrongdoer and there is a cause of death in me , I am ready for death : if it is not as they say against me , no man may give me up to them . Let my cause come before Caesar .
Then Festus , having had a discussion with the Jews , made answer , You have said , Let my cause come before Caesar ; to Caesar you will go .
Now when some days had gone by , King Agrippa and Bernice came to Caesarea and went to see Festus .
And as they were there for some days , Festus gave them Paul's story , saying , There is a certain man here who was put in prison by Felix :
Against whom the chief priests and the rulers of the Jews made a statement when I was at Jerusalem , requesting me to give a decision against him .
To whom I gave answer that it is not the Roman way to give a man up , till he has been face to face with those who are attacking him , and has had a chance to give an answer to the statements made against him .
So , when they had come together here , straight away , on the day after , I took my place on the judge's seat and sent for the man .
But when they got up they said nothing about such crimes as I had in mind :
But had certain questions against him in connection with their religion , and about one Jesus , now dead , who , Paul said , was living .
And as I had not enough knowledge for the discussion of these things , I made the suggestion to him to go to Jerusalem and be judged there .
But when Paul made a request that he might be judged by Caesar , I gave orders for him to be kept till I might send him to Caesar .
And Agrippa said to Festus , I have a desire to give the man a hearing myself . Tomorrow , he said , you may give him a hearing .
So on the day after , when Agrippa and Bernice in great glory had come into the public place of hearing , with the chief of the army and the chief men of the town , at the order of Festus , Paul was sent for .
And Festus said , King Agrippa , and all those who are present here with us , you see this man , about whom all the Jews have made protests to me , at Jerusalem and in this place , saying that it is not right for him to be living any longer .
But , in my opinion , there is no cause of death in him , and as he himself has made a request to be judged by Caesar , I have said that I would send him .
But I have no certain account of him to send to Caesar . So I have sent for him to come before you , and specially before you , King Agrippa , so that after the business has been gone into , I may have something to put in writing .
For it seems to me against reason to send a prisoner without making clear what there is against him .
And Agrippa said to Paul , You may put your cause before us . Then Paul , stretching out his hand , made his answer , saying :
In my opinion I am happy , King Agrippa , to be able to give my answer before you today to all these things which the Jews say against me :
The more so , because you are expert in all questions to do with the Jews and their ways : so I make my request to you to give me a hearing to the end .
All the Jews have knowledge of my way of life from my early years , as it was from the start among my nation , and at Jerusalem ;
And they are able to say , if they would give witness , that I was living as a Pharisee , in that division of our religion which is most regular in the keeping of the law .
And now I am here to be judged because of the hope given by God's word to our fathers ;
For the effecting of which our twelve tribes have been working and waiting night and day with all their hearts . And in connection with this hope I am attacked by the Jews , O king !
Why , in your opinion , is it outside belief for God to make the dead come to life again ?
For I , truly , was of the opinion that it was right for me to do a number of things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth .
And this I did in Jerusalem : and numbers of the saints I put in prison , having had authority given to me from the chief priests , and when they were put to death , I gave my decision against them .
And I gave them punishment frequently , in all the Synagogues , forcing them to say things against God ; and burning with passion against them , I went after them even into far-away towns .
Then , when I was journeying to Damascus with the authority and orders of the chief priests ,
In the middle of the day , on the road I saw a light from heaven , brighter than the sun , shining round me and those who were journeying with me .
And when we had all gone down on the earth , a voice came to me , saying in the Hebrew language , Saul , Saul , why are you attacking me so cruelly ? It is hard for you to go against the impulse which is driving you .
And I said , Who are you , Lord ? And the Lord said , I am Jesus , whom you are attacking .
But get up on your feet : for I have come to you for this purpose , to make you a servant and a witness of the things in which you have seen me , and of those in which you will see me ;
And I will keep you safe from the people , and from the Gentiles , to whom I send you ,
To make their eyes open , turning them from the dark to the light , and from the power of Satan to God , so that they may have forgiveness of sins and a heritage among those who are made holy by faith in me .
So , then , King Agrippa , I did not go against the vision from heaven ;
But I went about , first to those in Damascus and Jerusalem , and through all the country of Judaea , and then to the Gentiles , preaching a change of heart , so that they , being turned to God , might give , in their works , the fruits of a changed heart .
For this reason , the Jews took me in the Temple , and made an attempt to put me to death .
And so , by God's help , I am here today , witnessing to small and great , saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would come about ;
That the Christ would go through pain , and being the first to come back from the dead , would give light to the people and to the Gentiles .
And when he made his answer in these words , Festus said in a loud voice , Paul , you are off your head ; your great learning has made you unbalanced .
Then Paul said , I am not off my head , most noble Festus , but my words are true and wise .
For the king has knowledge of these things , to whom I am talking freely ; being certain that all this is common knowledge to him ; for it has not been done in secret .
King Agrippa , have you faith in the prophets ? I am certain that you have .
And Agrippa said to Paul , A little more and you will be making me a Christian .
And Paul said , It is my prayer to God that , in little or great measure , not only you , but all those hearing me today might be even as I am , but for these chains .
And the king and the ruler and Bernice and those who were seated with them got up ;
And when they had gone away they said to one another , This man has done nothing which might give cause for death or prison .
And Agrippa said to Festus , This man might have been made free , if he had not put his cause before Caesar .
And when the decision had been made that we were to go by sea to Italy , they gave Paul and certain other prisoners into the care of a captain named Julius , of the Augustan band .
And we went to sea in a ship of Adramyttium which was sailing to the sea towns of Asia , Aristarchus , a Macedonian of Thessalonica , being with us .
And on the day after , we came to Sidon ; and Julius was kind to Paul , and let him go to see his friends and take a rest .
And sailing again from there , we went on under cover of Cyprus , because the wind was against us .
And having gone across the sea off Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to Myra , in Lycia .
And there the captain came across a ship of Alexandria , sailing for Italy , and put us in it .
And when we had gone on slowly for a long time , and had had hard work getting across to Cnidus , for the wind was against us , we went under cover of Crete , in the direction of Salmone ;
And sailing down the side of it , as well as we were able , we came to a certain place named Fair Havens , near which was the town of Lasea .
And as a long time had gone by , and the journey was now full of danger , because it was late in the year , Paul put the position before them ,
Saying , Friends , I see that this journey will be one of great damage and loss , not only to the goods and the ship , but to ourselves .
But the captain gave more attention to the master and the owner of the ship than to what Paul said .
And as the harbour was not a good one in which to be for the winter , the greater number of them were for going out to sea , in order , if possible , to put in for the winter at Phoenix , a harbour of Crete , looking to the north-east and south-east .
And when the south wind came softly , being of the opinion that their purpose might be effected , they let the ship go and went sailing down the side of Crete , very near to the land .
But after a little time , a very violent wind , named Euraquilo , came down from it with great force .
And when the ship got into the grip of it , and was not able to make headway into the wind , we gave way , and went before it .
And , sailing near the side of a small island named Cauda , we were able , though it was hard work , to make the ship's boat safe :
And having got it up , they put cords under and round the ship ; but fearing that they might be pushed on to the Syrtis , they let down the sails and so went running before the wind .
And , still fighting the storm with all our strength , the day after they made a start at getting the goods out of the ship ;
And on the third day , they let all the sailing apparatus go over the side .
And as we had not seen the sun or stars for a long time , and a great storm was on us , all hope of salvation was gone .
And when they had been without food for a long time , Paul got up among them and said , Friends , it would have been better if you had given attention to me and not gone sailing out from Crete , to undergo this damage and loss .
But now , I say to you , be of good heart , for there will be no loss of life , but only of the ship .
For this night there came to my side an angel of the God who is my Master and whose servant I am ,
Saying , Have no fear , Paul , for you will come before Caesar , and God has given to you all those who are sailing with you .
And so , O men , be of good heart , for I have faith in God that it will be as he said to me .
But we will be sent on to a certain island .
But when the fourteenth day came , while we were going here and there in the Adriatic sea , about the middle of the night the sailors had an idea that they were getting near land ;
And they let down the lead , and saw that the sea was a hundred and twenty feet deep ; and after a little time they did it again and it was ninety feet .
Then , fearing that by chance we might come on to the rocks , they let down four hooks from the back of the ship , and made prayers for the coming of day .
Then the sailors made attempts secretly to get away from the ship , letting down a boat as if they were about to put down hooks from the front of the ship ;
But Paul said to the captain and his men , If you do not keep these men in the ship , you will not be safe .
Then the armed men , cutting the cords of the boat , let her go .
And when dawn was near , Paul gave them all orders to take food , saying , This is the fourteenth day you have been waiting and taking no food .
So I make request to you to take food ; for this is for your salvation : not a hair from the head of any of you will come to destruction .
And when he had said this and had taken bread , he gave praise to God before them all , and took a meal of the broken bread .
Then they all took heart and did the same .
And we were , in the ship , two hundred and seventy-six persons .
And when they had had enough food , they made the weight of the ship less , turning the grain out into the sea .
And when it was day , they had no knowledge of the land , but they saw an inlet of the sea with a floor of sand , and they had the idea of driving the ship up on to it if possible .
So cutting away the hooks , and letting them go into the sea , and freeing the cords of the guiding-blades , and lifting up the sail to the wind , they went in the direction of the inlet .
And coming to a point between two seas , they got the ship to land ; and the front part was fixed in the sand and not able to be moved , but the back part was broken by the force of the waves .
Then the armed men were for putting the prisoners to death , so that no one would get away by swimming .
But the captain , desiring to keep Paul safe , kept them from their purpose , and gave orders that those who had knowledge of swimming were to go off the ship and get first to land :
And the rest , some on boards and some on things from the ship . And so it came about that they all got safe to land .
And when we were safe , we made the discovery that the island was named Melita .
And the simple people living there were uncommonly kind to us , for they made a fire for us , and took us in , because it was raining and cold .
But when Paul had got some sticks together and put them on the fire , a snake came out , because of the heat , and gave him a bite on the hand .
And when the people saw it hanging on his hand , they said to one another , Without doubt this man has put someone to death , and though he has got safely away from the sea , God will not let him go on living .
But shaking off the beast into the fire , he got no damage .
But they had the idea that they would see him becoming ill , or suddenly falling down dead ; but after waiting a long time , and seeing that no damage came to him , changing their opinion , they said he was a god .
Now near that place there was some land , the property of the chief man of the island , who was named Publius ; who very kindly took us into his house as his guests for three days .
And the father of Publius was ill , with a disease of the stomach ; to whom Paul went , and put his hands on him , with prayer , and made him well .
And when this took place , all the others in the island who had diseases came and were made well .
Then they gave us great honour , and , when we went away , they put into the ship whatever things we were in need of .
And after three months we went to sea in a ship of Alexandria sailing under the sign of the Dioscuri , which had been at the island for the winter .
And going into the harbour at Syracuse , we were waiting there for three days .
And from there , going about in a curve , we came to Rhegium : and after one day a south wind came up and on the day after we came to Puteoli :
